
1.1 Importance of
Employability Skills
In this lesson you will learn :
1. What are employability skills
2.
Importance of employability skills
3. How to become a self-learner with growth mindset
You’ll see many people around you who are in a job or business (parents, siblings (brother/sister), friends or teachers). Tick on qualities you think that helps them in their job or business.
Thinking Box
Good communication skills.
Problem-solving skills
Good typing skills.
Quick-learner
Good cooking skills.
Fighting skills
Good English writing skills.
Teamwork
Let’s learn about Employability Skills
Employ
Ability
Skill
To be in a job or work for salary
+
To have the right skills, knowledge required to do something
+
The ability to not only know something, but also do it in action
=
Employability Skills
Employ: To be given a job by an employer or to have one’s own business. A person is said to be employed when they get paid for their work on a regular basis.
Ability: To have the skills to perform a task well.
Skills: The ability to do something well.
Therefore, employability skills are a set of many skills which we need to be sucessfully employed. Employability skills not only help in our work life, but also help us lead a better life. For example, learning financial skills will help you manage your money for personal needs also.
In this book you are going to learn about many skills that help you in the short term and long term for work & personal life.
14
Q1: You have started a business of a car repair shop. Now you want to hire a
full time employee to support you. You have received a number of resumes
for interviews.
What skills set would you look for in an employee? Check the boxes.
Identifies problems with cars
Repairing and replacing defective parts of cars
Manages their house well
Good communication skills
Use computers to make bills for the customers
Honesty and dedication towards the work
Q2: Sakina works in sales. She needs to call customers to share information
about the latest products. She needs to be clear about what to say. What
skills will help Sakina?
Digital literacy
Money management skills
Good communication skills
Time management skills
Let’s learn about the importance of Employability Skills
In today’s competitive job market, it’s important to be unique. To get a good job & grow in our career we need two types of skills:
1. Technical Skills (Ex: Stitching, Carpentry, IT, Plumbing etc)
2. Employability Skills (Soft skills which will help you use your technical skills well & have a successful career)
Employability Skills can help you:

Know how to behave in a professional environment
How to work with a team

Identify and solve problems

Communicate well at work
Gain digital literacy

Find a meaningful career path
Get hired for a job

Learn how to use digital technology comfortably

Speak English confidently

Be confident as a person

Present yourself well in the workplace
Lots of employers will final hiring decisions based on how well candidates have both kinds of skills!
Make a group of 5 people. Form an imaginary company (companies can be of any sector, like Retail, Information Technology, Manufacturing, Financial Service, Hospitality etc). List down the top 10 skills that you would like your employees to have.
15
Let’s learn about how to become a self-learner with a growth mindset
Self-learning is something we have been doing all our life! It is learning something on our own. We usually think we need teachers or elders to teach us something new. But, we can learn by ourselves also. We don’t always need a school, classroom or a teacher to teach.
Self learning happens when you take responsibility for your own learning. It is a process in which you decide to learn a new thing in your own way. For example, as a self learner you get to decide the following:
What to learn?
Why to learn?
How to learn?
When to learn?
How fast to learn?
How do I test myself?
A self-learner is the one who:

Believes they can learn

Is curious

Takes initiatives

Explore independently

Accept responsibility
Manages time

In order to be a successful self-learner you need one important thing - a growth mindset.
What is the Growth Mindset?
A growth mindset is the opposite of a fixed mindset. A person with a growth mindset is always willing to grow, change and learn. A person with a fixed mindset is rigid - they cannot change easily or allow new ideas to make them better.
To be a self learner, one needs to have a growth mindset. Because, when we learn something by ourselves we may make many mistakes, we may fail a few times also. Learning to keep on trying and not giving up till we succeed is what really helps us grow in life.
Growth mindset
Fixed mindset

I can do this

I cannot do this
Mistakes are normal
Mistakes are unacceptable

I will learn from my mistakes
Mistakes are equal to failure



I will try again
I will work hard
I can learn new things


If I fail once, I will always fail
I cannot work hard

I am happy to change

I cannot learn new things

I am happy to accept if I am wrong


I do not like to change
I cannot be wrong
16
Which mindset do you think you have? Do the activity below to find out!
Activity Time!
Table 1
Table 2
I’m a curious person. I google about many things that I want to know.
I should not waste my efforts in learning new things.
I believe that by practice, I can improve myself.
I believe that failures are learning.
I accept challenges.
When I see others succeed, it inspires me.
I believe that feedback is an opportunity to learn.
I believe that most skills are god gifted and it can’t be learned over time.
I should not try anything new which can lead me to fail.
I feel threatened by others’ success.
I should not take feedback from anyone.
If you selected most of the activities in Table 1, you may have a Growth mindset.
If you selected most of the activities in Table 2, you may have a Fixed mindset.
It is time for you to reflect on the above exercise you did for yourself.
What I learnt today:
Put a if you know this topic well.
1. Employability skills are a set of many skills which we need
to be sucessfully employed.
2. Lots of employers will make final hiring decisions based
on what other skills candidates can bring to the job apart from their technical trade based skills.
3. Having self-learning skills help you achieve lifelong
learning and opportunities to grow in your career.
4. Growth mindset is important to be a self learner.
17
1.2 Learning Employability
Skills Online
In this lesson you will learn :
1. What is e-learning?
2. The benefits of e-learning
3. How to log into e-learning portals for Employability Skills
What do you know about online learning and its benefits?
Thinking Box
Let’s learn what is e-learning
The COVID-19 pandemic has changed how learning takes place all over the world. Many learners, like yourself, started learning online through online classes, YouTube videos, different apps etc.
Online learning or e-learning is education or learning received online, via digital devices such as:

Computers

Tablets

Smartphones

Any other devices that can be connected to the internet
Through e-learning, you can use educational materials at any time and from any place!
You can go beyond the limits of traditional books and classrooms, and learn through many sources. You may use formats like e-books, PDFs, audio, video, online lectures etc. You can learn trade skills as well as Employability Skills.
What are the top three things you want to learn online?
1.
2.
3.
18
Let’s learn about benefits of e-learning
E-learning is not only for your college or education days! With online education you can learn skills which can help you do your job well. This can be a continuous process, throughout your career. In fact, if you keep improving your skills, your career growth is better.
Quick delivery of lessons
Increased learner engagement
Improved recall and retention
Let’s have a look at how e-learning can help you gain employability in the 21st Century:

Practice and learn digital skills
Develop in-demand job skills

Explore new career pathways
Get new skills at a lower cost

Access to latest content
More resources and greater flexibility
Ease of access

Learn what you are interested in

Career growth
E-learning is changing the job market for employees all over the world. You will now have to learn continuously and gain new skills to grow in your career. Hence, as a 21st Century learner, you must explore the world of e-learning.
Q1. What kind of jobs are you looking for after your ITI course?
Q2. What skills can you learn online to help you get this job?
Let’s learn how to log into e-learning portals for Employability Skills
An e-learning portal is a website that gives you access to online learning material. There are several websites to help you learn Employability Skills online. Here are some websites to get you started:
Employability skills portals
Web address
Purpose
Bharat Skills Portal
https://bharatskills.gov.in/
Discover online lessons and study material for trade skills and employability skills
eSkill India
https://eskillindia.org/
Gain access to free, certified online courses
ASEEM
https://smis.nsdcindia.org/
Help you find sustainable livelihood opportunities.
19
NSDC
https://nsdcindia.org/
Seek aid for funds to set up profitable training centers and vocational centers.
NIMI portal
https://nimi.gov.in/ver2_/
For instructional materials, e-content, Question Banks for the use of the trainees.
NAPS portal
https://www. apprenticeshipindia.gov.in/
Apply for apprenticeship opportunities relevant to your trade
Scheme portals
https://www.india.gov.in/ my-government/schemes
Get access to information about several welfare schemes of the Government
Activity Time!
There are many e-portals available to learn employability skills. You
will demonstrate how to log into one. Let’s explore one of the most
useful portals for ITI learners, the Bharat Skills Portal.
Step 1: Check for internet connectivity.
Step 2: Open Internet Explorer (Chrome, Mozilla or Firefox) or launch google.com
Step 3: Type the web address/portal address ‘bharatskills.gov.in’ then press the Enter key.
Step 4: The Portal dashboard will be displayed with course, training and notifications like in the image below.
20
Step 5: To join training you can click on the interested training course.
Step 6: To learn trade related skills online, click on ‘ITI Blended Learning’ option.
Step 7: To enroll and register yourself click on the enroll button.
Step 8: Enter your username in the Username field, your email address and enter your Portal Password, select ‘Create new account’.
Step 9: The training login screen will appear as displayed below, enter the details and you would be able to access the training materials.
Step 10: Now to access study material for various courses, choose your course in the displayed list. You can now access study material, employability skills, mock tests and much more!
Step 11: You can also use OTP based login. At Bharat Skills portal, click on the ‘useful links’ menu. You will be directed to below link for OTP based login
http://employabilityskills.net/app/users/login
21
Tip for you:
Keep your password very simple to remember. Write down your login id and password here
so you don’t forget it:
Bharat Skills Login id: ____________________________
Bharat Skills Password: ______________________________
What I learnt today:
Put a if you know this topic well.
1. E-learning means learning received online, via digital
devices such as: computer, smartphone, tablets etc.
2. E-learning helps us in improving our digital skills, as well as
in finding jobs
3. E-learning helps us become a 21st century learner
4. There are different e-learning portals to learn employability skills online such as Bharat skills, NSDC, NAPS, NIMI etc.
1.3 Future of Work
In this lesson you will learn :
1. Exploring post-COVID job market
2. The future of work
3. What skills do you need for the future of work?
Pick the statement/s that you feel is true:
1. World will never be the same again after the COVID 19 Pandemic.
Thinking Box
2. We’ll be back to normal in 2 years.
3. A new world, with new types of jobs, new working conditions will get created.
Let’s learn about the post-COVID 19 job market
The COVID 19 pandemic brought the entire world to a halt. There was uncertainty all over the world at the start of the pandemic. Schools, offices, colleges and shops were closed. Many people lost their jobs and some even lost their loved ones.
Now as the world is slowly recovering, there are new trends, especially in the job market - in India and around the world.
22
Let’s take a closer look at the post COVID 19 job market:
1. Digitization or automation of jobs:
Many jobs are getting digitised. Machines and humans are replacing human beings in the workplace. For example, robots are being used to serve food instead of waiters in restaurants in Mumbai, Bangalore and Ahmedabad.
2. Remote Working:
Many offices have closed down because staff are working from home. Big IT companies are making working from home the new working policy. This has helped women and caretakers to work better. At the same time, it has created additional pressure on them to manage office work and home work.
3. Hiring from a wider pool of candidates:
Because people can work from anywhere, companies are willing to hire candidates from all over the country. For example, if an office is based in Bangalore, candidates from all over India can apply and work from their own home. This has increased the competition for good jobs.
4. Need for digital skills:
It has become very important to have basic digital skills. Everyone from vegetable vendors, big supermarkets to small shops now use digital currency.
5. Rise of platform economy:
Digital businesses such as Uber, Ola, Zomato, Big Basket, Swiggy have increased their business. Instead of having physical shops, products are displayed on a digital app or website.
6. Focus on Green Jobs:
This is a new job sector in the 21st century. Green jobs are jobs that help to reduce pollution, preserve the environment and the planet. Such jobs get additional support through subsidies from the Govt.
23
There have been many changes in the world of work during and after the COVID 19 pandemic. What are some changes that you have noticed?
Let’s learn about the future of work
In the past few years, there has also been rapid growth in certain industries in India. There are new kinds of job sectors that are coming up with new and exciting opportunities that we haven’t seen before.
Jobs that have become outdated or reduced in demand in the past 5 years:

STD booths

Photo studios

Audio cassette/ CD recording

Scissors grinder

Bicycle repair
Jobs roles that exist now that were not present 5 years ago:
Ola/Uber driving

Swiggy/Zomato delivery
Mobile repair

Social media influencer, Youtuber
The following sectors are most likely to grow rapidly in the coming years:
Online retail
Healthcare

Pharmaceutical

Financial and banking

Computers and IT
Gig work sector (Online education, transportation services and caterers)
Green jobs (Environmental Technician, Solar Installer, Recycling Worker)
Find out the new type of job opportunities available for your trade by searching online What are the different job roles available?
24
Let’s learn about 21st century workplace skills According to India Skills Report 2022 by Wheebox, only 48.7% of total youth in India is employable. This means almost 1 out 2 Indian youths are not employable. The study also says that about 75% of all the companies surveyed reported that candidates don’t have the skills that employers need. Additionally, the job market will keep changing continuously (the way it changed during COVID 19). The skills we have today will not be of much use in the future. To stay employed, we need to keep on learning new skills.
How can young professionals stay competitive in this demanding and changing job market?
These 21st Century Skills will help you get employed and create a successful career path, even when the job market keeps changing continuously.
Tip: Use Google search to understand what these skills mean, if you don’t understand them.
21st Century Skills
Foundational Literacies
Competencies
Character Qualities
How students apply core skills to everyday tasks
How students approach complex challenges
How students approach their changing environment

Literacy
Numeracy

Critical thinking/ problem-solving


Curiosity
Initiative

Scientific literacy

Creativity

Persistence/grit

ICT literacy

Communication

Adaptability

Financial literacy

Collaboration

Leadership

Cultural and civic literacy

Social and cultural awareness
Q1. What do you think the words “21st Century Skills” mean?
Q2. Which of the listed 21st Century skills do you wish to learn?
25
Activity Time!
21st Century Skill
Rate yourself
What can you do to improve your score?
Communication
____/10
English Literacy
____/10
Digital Literacy
____/10
Financial Literacy
____/10
Problem Solving
____/10
Flexibility
____/10
Creativity
____/10
Entrepreneurship
____/10
Career mindset
____/10
What I learnt today:
Put a if you know this topic well.
1. The COVID 19 pandemic had a great impact on the job
scenario in India and across the world.
2. Some jobs became obsolete (out of use) while a lot of new
jobs emerged.
3. 21st Century Skills will help you get good employment and
create a successful career path.
26
