
10.1 Introduction to the
World of Work
In this lesson you will learn :
1. The difference between job and career
2. The difference between personal and professional life
3. How to prepare for the world of work
Name top 3 differences in how we need to behave in our personal and professional life
Thinking Box
Let’s identify the difference between job and career
Has anyone asked what you want to do when you grow up? They are asking about your career and not your job! Are you confused? Read further to understand.
Career means the kind of work a person does to reach their full potential. A career depends on a person’s strengths, goals and aspirations, beliefs, qualifications. Career results from various decisions that we make throughout life. It is a lifelong process.
Career and job are different. Here are the differences between job and career:
S. No.
Job
Career
1.
A job has a definite starting point and ending point.
For ex: Your job can be a teacher in a school.
Our career is the real progression of our professional life. It can include many different jobs over the years.
For ex: In your teaching career, you can be a tuition teacher, school teacher, principal, trainer of other teachers etc
348
2.
Jobs are well defined and have a fixed title and salary.
Careers are broad and include a person’s educational qualification, interests, abilities, skills, certification, and diplomas.
3.
The career is the connection between these multiple jobs.
A person’s career may include multiple jobs
For example, let us observe the principal’s career of your ITI. In their career, your principal could have had the job of being a trainer, a placement officer, or a deputy principal. Before becoming a principal, they would have undergone several training sessions and done many different tasks and jobs in the ITI. So in their career, they have done different jobs to reach their full potential.
Skills
Certification
Education Qualification
Interest
Abilities
Job
Diplomas
Job
Job
What is the difference between a job and a career?
Career
Let’s understand the difference between personal and professional life
Personal life consists of everything we do outside of your work. It can be our relationship, leisure time, time for us to rest, relaxation, entertainment, hobbies, family time, health and fitness, etc. Personal life is important as it enriches us and gives us time to rest/relax.
Professional life refers to our working life. It can be our career, our business, or our job.
It is important to separate your personal and professional life. It will help ensure that we can be there for our family, friends, etc. It will also help us get results in your professional life.
Here are some tips on separating your personal and professional life:
1. Have a specific time for work during which you only perform
your tasks. Do not get distracted by talking to family members, social media, etc.
2. Take rests and short pauses to recharge yourself. Sitting in
front of your computer desk the whole day will decrease your productivity.
Work
3.
Improve your skills from time to time. Read books, and attend seminars and workshops that will improve your skills.
Life
4. Prioritize your work tasks based on how urgent and important
they are.
349
Why is it important to balance personal and professional life?
Let’s learn how to prepare for the world of work The world of work is a place where people work or are employed. This can include finding a job, moving up in the job, finding new jobs, learning to be better at a job, etc. To grow in a job, we need to stay up-to-date about the latest skills and technologies.
To prepare for the world of work, you need to focus on building a few important skills. You can start learning about these skills now, and keep on developing them as you grow in your career.
These skills are:

Communication skills

Flexibility / Adaptability

Critical Thinking
Decision making

Problem-solving
Digital Literacy

Soft Skills

Self Learning
Tip: If you want to know the meaning of the skills mentioned above, search about it on Google.
Many skills and qualities are needed to succeed at work. Few of the important skills are listed below.
Activity Time!
Put a tick mark in one of the columns based on if you have already done this.
I have done this
I will do this soon (mention by when you will complete this)
I know my interests and abilities
I can introduce myself to others
350
I have a career plan
I have discussed my career plan with my family members
I have a PAN card and an active bank account
I have an email address
I can search for jobs online
I have a resume
I have attended a mock interview
I have conducted a Market Scan
I have a plan to manage & save my money
This is an individual activity. However, you can discuss
it with a friend if you need some support.
351
What I learnt today:
Put a if you know this topic well.
1. Career and job are different. Job is short-term. A career
combines the different jobs, qualifications, and roles one has in their entire professional journey.
2. Personal life is what we do outside of work. Professional life is our life in the workplace.
3. Work-Life balance is very important to have a healthy
and happy life.
4. The world of work is a place where people work or are employed. We need to keep our skills updated to be relevant in work.
10.2 My Interests and Abilities
In this lesson you will learn :
1. Difference between interests and abilities
2.
Identifying your own interests and abilities
What are 3 things that you really like to do?
1.
Thinking Box
2.
3.
What are 3 things that you do very well?
1.
2.
3.
352
Let’s learn the difference between interests and abilities
S. No.
Interests
Abilities
1.
Interests are those that one is passionate about.
Abilities are activities that one is good at and can.
2.
These are the activities that we love doing, but we might not be good at.
These are the activities that we are good at but may not give us joy.
It is an interesting challenge to identify how we can match our abilities to fit into the areas we are interested in.
It is possible to have abilities that we are not fully aware of. We come to know about our abilities when other people tell us that we are good at something. It is also possible that we can develop our abilities in a particular area, if we have an interest in it. Our interests and abilities may not be in the same field. Our interests might change through our lives.
Assessing interest and abilities in choosing a career
Interests
Abilities
Career options
Q1. Zubia loves to draw. But she is good at singing.
Which of the following is Zubia’s ability? a) Drawing b) Singing
Q2. Pakur is very good at cooking. He loves to dance.
Which of the following is Pakur’s interest? a) Cooking b) Dancing
353
Let’s learn how to identify your own interests and abilities
It is important to identify our interests while planning a career. Working on the activities of our interest gives us satisfaction and happiness. It is very important that an individual considers their strengths while choosing a career. Ability becomes an important aspect for an individual to succeed at a task. Having the ability to do the particular work helps the individual feel motivated. It also ensures that we deliver results at our workplace.
Let us now identify our interests and abilities. Think about your life and answer the questions.
Interests
Q1. If you had free time in the next 48 hours, what would you do with it?
Q2. What do you answer when people ask you “What is your interest?”
Abilities
Q1. What talents do your friends and family know you for?
Q2. What skills do people usually come to you for?
Why is it important to identify our interests and abilities?
354
Read The Given Paragraph And Answer The Questions.
Activity Time!
Bishnoi is a successful fashion designer in Bombay. As a 15-year old boy, he used to love singing. He used to participate in many singing competitions. He went for a Talent Hunt auditions, but did not get selected. He felt sad, and decided not to sing anymore.
After completing school, he joined a diploma course in fashion design. He performed very well in theory and practical. He found out that he was very good at dress-making and embroidery. He completed the course with the top marks in his class.
Q1. What is Bishnoi’s interest?
Q2. What are Bishnoi’s abilities?
Q3. Was Bishnoi aware of his abilities?
Q4. How did Bishnoi become aware of his abilities?
What I learnt today:
Put a if you know this topic well.
1.
Interests are those that one is passionate about. Abilities are activities that one is good at and can.
2.
I know how to identify my interests and abilities.
3.
I know my Interests and abilities.
355
10.3 Building My Career
Pathway
In this lesson you will learn :
1.
Importance of career pathways
2. How to explore career pathways in different industries
What are the different career paths or routes open to you after completing your trade?
Thinking Box
1.
2.
3.
Let’s learn about the importance of career pathways
Today we have a lot of career directions/ paths which were not available to earlier generations. On the one hand, it is exciting to have so many possibilities. But it can also feel stressful and confusing, if we have no sense of purpose or direction. We could waste precious time in low paying, unsatisfying jobs. Choosing a career path early can give us a good-start on a bright future.
A career path is a series of jobs that help you progress towards your goals and objectives. For example, if your goal is to become a principal, you’d typically start as a teacher. You can apply for promotions and also learn leadership skills to reach your goal.
After you complete studying, many career paths are available to you. You can choose any path, depending on your interests and abilities. Your career path is your decision, others can only influence or inform you!
Tip: In the 21st century, newer jobs and career paths are getting formed every 5 years. So if you decide on a career path today, there is no need to stick to it 5 to 10 years later. If a better career path opens up for you, be free to follow it.
356
The most important thing in choosing a career path is to balance between two things:

Your interests, talent & ability
Demands, trends & jobs available in the market
With a career path you will:
Have clarity on your future: Your goals can be clear to you, helping you choose the right jobs

Learn the right skills: Based on how you want to grow, you can choose the skills you want to learn

Be flexible: You can choose your career path based on how the market demands are changing.
Why is it important to plan your career path?
Let’s learn how to explore career pathways in different industries
Form a group of 3 people. Look at the posters given. These are career pathway posters for the following careers:

Fashion designing

Computer Operator and Programming Assistant (COPA)

Cosmetology

Stenographer
As a group, go through each of the posters in detail. After you have gone through the posters, answer the questions given at the end of each poster.
357
CAREER PATHWAY
Q1. What are some of the skills required to take up this career?
Q2. What is the starting salary one can
expect in this career?
Q3. What are some new aspects that you learned about this career through this poster?
COMPUTER HARDWARE & NETWORK MAINTENANCE
Q1. What are some of the skills required to take up this career?
SKILLS TAUGHT IN ITI
SKILLS NEEDED BY COMPANY
Knowledge of basic electronics ● Assemble and repair Personal Computers (PC) & laptops
Knowledge of working, upgrading, troubleshooting PCs and laptops
Server installation and conﬁguration to manage
Hardware and software installation in PC & laptops ● applications, and powerpoint presentation)

printers, plotters, & scanners
Setting up and conﬁguring networking systems using network devices
Sharing resources and internet connection through
●
the network Implementation of network security protocol Installation and conﬁguration of Windows and Linux servers
Network security ● Safe handling of data ● ● Setup and conﬁguration of Local Area Network (LAN) ● Knowledge of internet usage
CAREER PATHS FOR THIS TRADE
Q2. What is the starting salary one can
expect in this career?
Browsing online and email communication
ENTRY LEVEL
Polytechnic Lab Assistant, ITI Workshop Assistant, Data Entry Operator, Network Trainee, Computer Service Assistant
JOB OPPORTUNITIES AFTER ITI
MIDLEVEL
Jobs in central government like railways ● Jobs in state government like government ITI, polytechnics, and engineering colleges ● Private companies like Wipro, HCL, Dell,TVS Electronics, VI Microsystems, & Zebronics India Pvt. Ltd
Senior Lab Assistant, Assistant Training
Network Technician, Computer Service Technician
SENIOR LEVEL
Superintendent, Manager - Network Administrator, Computer Hardware Engineer
UPSKILLING OPPORTUNITIES
Q3. What are some new aspects that you learned about this career through this poster?
Apprenticeship (NAC Certiﬁcate). ● Crafts Instructor Training Scheme (CITS) to become an instructor in ITI
Network academy course to become a network administrator
358
Q1. What are some of the skills required to take up this career?
Q2. What is the starting salary one can
expect in this career?
Q3. What are some new aspects that you learned about this career through this poster?
CAREER PATHWAY STENOGRAPHY
Immediate Skill Requirements
Typing speed- 25 words per minute for English, 30 words per minute for regional language with 95% accuracy Shorthand speed- 80 words per minute for English, 100 words per minute for regional language with 95% accuracy Communication Skills Credibility and trustworthiness as stenographers handle conﬁdential legal documents and proceedings
Preferred Skill Requirements
Proﬁciency in English speaking Grammar and intricacies of concerned language- English or regional language Knowledge of legal or medical terminology- basis of organization requirement
Q1. What are some of the skills required to take up this career?
Job Opportunities After ITI
Vacancies for stenographers are available from time to time at different Government Ministries and Institutions. They are advertised by SSC, UPSC for various departments and organizations. Apart from government institutions, there are plenty of opportunities in the private sector too.
Entry level Secretary, Personal Assistant/ Executive Assistant, Computer Operator, Data Operator, Typist
Mid-level Company Secretary, Ofﬁce Administration/ Coordination, Front Desk Executive
Career Opportunities Industry
Upskilling
Finance and Accounts Book-keeping Ofﬁce Administration/Management Hospitality Retail Front-Desk Operations
Tally Accounts Modern Ofﬁce Management Spoken English Modern Ofﬁce Management
Senior level Executive Assistant to Director, Administrative Secretary
Q2. What is the starting salary one can
expect in this career?
Q3. What are some new aspects that you learned about this career through this poster?
359
Continue with the same groups of 3 for this activity. As a group, decide on any one career path you want to explore (apart from the four careers mentioned in the last activity). Research on the career path that you choose. Try to collect information based on the headings given in the previous posters. Once you have collected the information, write it in the space given.
Activity Time!
Share the information with the class at the end of the activity.
What I learnt today:
Put a if you know this topic well.
1. A career path is a series of jobs that help you progress
towards your goals and objectives
2.
In the 21st century, newer jobs and career paths are getting formed every 5 years
3. Choosing a career path is to balance between your interests, talent & ability + demands, trends & jobs available in the market
4. Creating career pathway posters can give a lot of clarity on
that career
360
10.4 Job Market Research
In this lesson you will learn :
1. How to explore the world of work
2. How to conduct a market scan
What do you understand by the words “Job Market”?
Thinking Box
How can you get information about the “Job Market”?
Let’s learn how to explore the world of work
We have already learned about the world of work and its importance in previous lessons. In this lesson let’s learn how to explore it for the growth of our career.
1992
2002
2022
Over the past 30 years, workplaces in India have been transformed. Typewriters are replaced with computers and laptops. Landline phones have become mobile phones and so on. We have seen some of these changes happen in our homes and schools too. But have you ever thought of the jobs that have disappeared along with these changes? Are you aware of the new jobs that have been created?
361
With the example of the image above, think and make a list of jobs that have disappeared and jobs that have been created in the past 30 years
S. No.
Jobs that have disappeared or reduced
New jobs that have been created
1.
Typewriter repair person
Computer technician
2.
Postman or Postwoman
Youtube videomaker
3.
4.
5.
The world of work is always changing. We must be fully aware of these changes. Only then we can plan our career pathway.
Market Scan
Market scan is a process by which we can understand the ever-changing world of work. It helps us:

Identify the different career pathways available for our interests and abilities
Understand in more details about our chosen careers

Learn the how to be successful in our careers
Develop a plan to achieve our chosen career
Get inspired by others in our field
Let’s learn how to conduct a market scan
1.
Identify the career pathways you are interested in: You already know the difference between a job and a career. While conducting a market scan, focus on a career and not just a job. Eg: Retail sales instead of a job at a supermarket.
2.
Identify Sources of Information: Identify various sources where you can get information about your chosen career. Eg: Internet, industry visits, alumni, your teachers etc
3. Make a list of the different kinds of
information needed: What are the various kinds of information you need to know about your career? Eg: educational qualifications
362
necessary, technical skills required, etc.
4. Set targets and timelines: Set a timeline for yourself on how long you will take to collect all the
necessary information from all your sources
5. Prepare a Career Card: Bring together all the information you have collected about a particular career
in one place.
6. Share your knowledge: Share your career card and your knowledge with your friends. Learn from and
support each other so that all of us can grow together.
Are you clear about how to conduct a market scan? Let’s talk about the various ways to collect data about a career in more detail.
1.
Internet: You already know that not everything online is true or correct. So how can you make sure that you are getting the correct information? a. Government Websites: websites of the Ministry of Labour, Ministry of Human Resources etc have accurate information about various industries in the country. They can also help understand policies related to the industries. Policies can show trends of where the world of work is heading towards. b. Private websites: Trusted private websites such as career search websites ( Naukri, timesjobs, Monster etc), and professional networking websites ( Eg; Linked in) are all good sources to understand career options. They may also help you understand the requirements for a career option and talk to people already in that career.
2. Newspapers and Magazines: Many newspapers and magazines publish supplements or articles focused on career information. They contain information about existing or new career pathways, interviews with professionals or experts in the field, or even about upcoming job fairs.
3. Career guidance agencies: These are agencies that provide services to help you understand your
career interests and possible pathways. They can be in person or online, paid or free.
4. Discussion with Professionals: One of the best ways to learn more about a career is to talk to
someone who is already associated with work. You can ask them how they started their journey, what are their goals and expectations, what does their workday look like etc. You can also ask them about what they like most about their career and what is most challenging.
Conduct a Market Scan As per the steps provided above, conduct a market plan to help you identify and select the best career path for you. Make sure to use all the above methods to collect information. Share your career cards with each other and discuss them in the class. Below is a sample table to guide you.
Activity Time!
Question
Information
Name Companies/Organizations where you can find this type of work?
What are the qualifications necessary?
363
What are the additional skills required in this career?
What does a day in the work life look like?
What is the most exciting part of the work?
What are some of the challenges faced in the career?
What are the growth opportunities?
What is the expected salary for a fresher?
Any other information necessary
What I learnt today:
Put a if you know this topic well.
1. Market scan is helpful in understanding the ever-changing
world of work.
2.
Identifying the career pathways, source of information, target and timelines are crucial in market scan.
3. We must collect various data about a career using the
internet, newspapers, career guidance agencies and working professionals.
364
10.5 Goal Setting for Your Career
In this lesson you will learn :
1. How to define your long-term and short-term goals
2. How to use SMART goals to prepare a plan for a job or career
Mention the top 3 things you want to achieve in the next 1 year
Thinking Box
1.
2.
3.
Mention the top 5 things you want to achieve in the next 5 years
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
Let’s learn how to define your long-term and short-term goals
You must have often heard the term goal. Your teachers, your parents, and your elders must have asked you “what is your goal”. What do they mean by goal?
A goal is what you deeply desire or wish for from your life. It is something you select from many choices, make a plan to achieve it and take the right actions to achieve it.
Goal = Desire/Wish + Plan + Actions
365
A long-term goal is something you want to achieve well into the future. Eg: Starting your own company.
A short-term goal is something you plan to achieve within a year. Usually, it is one more step towards achieving one of your long-term goals. Sometimes they are also called Milestones. Eg: Identify 3 investors for your start-up.
Oh that’s a great goal. What are your steps towards it?
I want to start my own company that produces low cost home appliances
First, I have to finish college with a top rank. Then I have to get some experience in a home appliance company. After that I will start on the steps for my own company
Short-term goals
Long-term goals
Smaller and easier to achieve
Complex and harder to achieve
Timeline of weeks and months
Timeline of years
Larger in number
Fewer in number
Connected to your present situation
Uncertain and depends on achieving short term goals
Short Term goals:
CEO
A career goal refers to your vision of your career pathway. Eg: You want to become a CEO at a manufacturing company or you want to become an entrepreneur giving jobs to 100 people. Career goals also are long-term and short-term.
Get promoted
Get a
management degree
Long term goal: Become CEO of a manufacturing company
Get a job at a
manufacturing company
Graduate from ITI
And a lot of other steps like this till you can finally achieve your long-term goal.
366
What is your career goal? What are the short-term goals that will help you achieve your career goal?
Career goal
Short-term goals
You can do the same exercise for your personal goals too.
SMART Goals
Rahul’s goal is to score high marks in his 10th exams. He decides to study more in order to achieve his goal. When the results came, Rahul scored 60%. This was more than he had ever received before but Rahul and his family were all sad.
What do you think went wrong?
When we are setting our goals , we must be very clear about what we want. In the above example, ‘high marks’ is an unclear term. It can mean different things to different people. Similarly, what does study more, mean?
If we have to achieve our goal, we need to be very specific and clear about it. SMART goals help us do this.
SMART stands for
S
SPECIFIC
What exactly do you wish to achieve? Eg: I want to get at least 80% in my 10th exams.
M MEASURABLE
It should be possible to measure whether you have achieved your goal and also if you are on your way to achieving your goal. Eg: I will study for 4 hours each day; I will take mock tests and check if I am close to my target.
A ACHIEVABLE
Be realistic when setting your goals. Eg: If you are currently getting less than 50%, then aiming straight for more than 80% may not work out.
R
RELEVANT
Goals take time and effort. Make sure that your goals are useful for your personal and/or professional life. Make a list of why it is important to achieve this goal. Eg: Getting high marks in my 10th standard will help me get into my choice of subject for 12th or ITI.
T
TIMED
Have a specific timeline for your goal. Eg: This year’s 10th exam.
367
When you set your goals to be SMART, you are also simultaneously planning to achieve your goal. SMART goals are designed to help you define your goal, plan how to achieve them and identify if you have achieved them.
What is your career goal? Use the SMART goal method to detail your goal.
Activity Time!
Goal:
S
SPECIFIC
M MEASURABLE
A ACHIEVABLE
R
RELEVANT
T
TIMED
What I learnt today:
Put a if you know this topic well.
1. A goal is the desired result that one purposefully selects, plans for and
commits to achieve.
2. A long-term goal is something one wants to achieve well into the future
and that will take significant time.
3. A short-term goal is something one can achieve within a quick time
frame.
4. Milestones are the steps towards achieving long-term goals.
5. The SMART goals help us to be Specific, Measurable, Achievable,
Relevant, and Time-Bound.
368
