
11.1 Customer Service and Relationship Building
In this lesson you will learn :
1. The importance of customer service and interaction
2. The need to build customer relationships
3. How to build good relationships with customers
What do you think is the meaning of customer service? Give 2 examples.
Thinking Box
Let’s learn about the importance of customer service and interaction
Customer is a person who buys a product or service. Customer service is the service that we give a customer before, during or after a purchase.
For example when you go to a departmental store, the sales person near you volunteers to find the products and helps you with. When you go to buy a mobile phone, the sales person identifies your needs and starts giving you more options for mobile phones that you might want to buy. These are a few examples for customer service.
Why is customer service important?
1. When customer service is good, customers will come to the shop to buy products and services again
and again. This means that the business will grow.
2. Happy customers will talk to others about the products and service. So more new customers are
created.
369
5 Simple ways by which good customer service/ interaction can be achieved.
1. Smile and greet customers.
2. Help them with patience.
3. Clear the customers’ doubts wherever necessary.
4. Talk to them, understand their needs and support them accordingly.
5. You can share your goodwill by informing them about offers, discounts and new launches too.
Here is a list of good and bad ways to provide customer service.
Tick the good and bad ones from the checklist.
Good
Bad
Good
Bad
1. Patience
7. Complaints
2. Smile
8. Follow up
3. Product Knowledge
9. Delay in service
4. Rude
10. Dishonest
5.
Ignore the customer
11. Not knowing your
6. Pushing to buy ignore
customer
12. Disrespect
Let’s learn about the need to build customer relationship
The need for customer relationships is beyond putting a smile on the customer’s face. It is needed to:
1. Create a Positive Relationship: By understanding and resolving the concerns of the customer.
2. Retain Customers: By making customers come back again and again to buy the products/ service.
3. Ensure Customer Satisfaction: A fully satisfied customer becomes an Ambassador of the business. So
one must work towards customer satisfaction.
What will happen if we don’t develop a good relationship with customers?
Let’s learn about how to build good relationships with customers
Good relationships with customers can be built with time, effort and trust.
The 4 C’s to create good customer relationship
370
Connect
Identify your customers. Let your customers understand your product or service. Connect with your customers through social media, ads etc.
Create
People never forget how you made them feel, so create a unique experience for your customers.
Confirm
The unhappy customers are the greatest source of learning. Get feedback regularly and confirm the quality of your service.
Commit
Keep up the promise and respect your customers’ time.
Visit a couple of shops alone or with your friends. Do a keen observation of their customer service right and rate them on the basis of the checklist shared earlier. Come back and discuss your experiences with each other.
Activity Time!
What I learnt today:
Put a if you know this topic well.
1. Customer service is the service that we give a customer
before, during or after a purchase.
2. The growth of a business is based on how we treat and
interact with our customers.
3. Create a positive relationship, retain customers, ensure customer satisfaction is important in maintaining customer interaction
4. We must practice 4 C’s to build good relationships with
customers
371
11.2 Types of Customers
In this lesson you will learn :
1. Who is a customer
2. Different types of customers
3. How to communicate with the different types of customers
What are the different ways through which customers can help a business grow?
Thinking Box
Let’s learn about who is a customer
1. A customer is a person who buys a product or service from
a seller or vendor through a financial transaction.
2. Customers bring the revenue for a business.
So they are very important for small businesses as well as for big businesses.
3. Customers have the choice to choose their products / brands / services. All businesses have to compete with each other to attract customers with their new ideas and offers
As a customer, write down your favorite products or services.
Products
Services
372
Let’s learn about different types of customers
Identifying the different types of customers helps us to deal with them effectively.
There are 5 types of customers:
New Customers
Dissatisfied Customers
1. New Customers – A customer who buys a
product / service for the first time
2. Loyal Customers – A customer who repeatedly
buys a product or service.
3. Dissatisfied Customers – A customer who is
not happy with the product or service and has complaints towards it.
Loyal Customers
Researching Customers
4. Researching Customers – Customers who do a lot of analysis, comparisons and reviews before buying or using any product or services. You may need to engage with them several times.
5. Bargaining Customers – A customer who looks
for offers / best deals / discounts or additional benefits in their purchase and argues for the same.
Bargaining Customers
Recall an incident when you were an ‘angry customer’. How could the customer service be better to not make you angry?
Let’s learn about how to communicate with different types of customers
Best ways to handle the different types of customers
1. New Customers

The good thing about this type of customer is they have already finished their research and are very close to buying a product/ service.
Guide them with more options.

Keep the customer well informed about the product or service details.

In short, be ready to answer all their queries.
2. Loyal Customers

Show appreciation to such customers.

Provide them with additional benefits & special offers.
can also make them feel happy.
A well-written thank you note along with some discounts
373
3. Dissatisfied Customers

Show them empathy in the first place.
Make them understand that you are eager to solve their problem.

Act very quickly.

Do not hesitate to apologize.
4. Researching Customers

Ensure to provide maximum details.

Talk about testimonials and user feedback.

Provide them with comparison against competitors.

Allow them to use samples and show them demonstrations.
5. Bargaining Customers
Make them understand the value they gain from customer service. Treat them specially.

They will be attracted to huge deals and sales.

Fix the right price.
As a customer, what will be your 3 most important expectations?
Activity Time!
1.
2.
3.
What I learnt today:
Put a if you know this topic well.
1. A customer is a person who buys a product or service from
a seller or vendor.
2. Customers have the choice to choose their products /
brands / services.
3.
Identifying the different types of customers helps us to deal with them effectively.
4. Keeping customers well informed about the product,
solving problems, attracting them on huge deals and sales will promote business.
374
11.3 Probing to Identify Customer Needs
In this lesson you will learn :
1. Recognize the importance of understanding customer needs &
expectations
2. How to identify customer needs
3. Practice probing with customers
What questions can you ask to understand customers’ needs?
Thinking Box
Let’s learn about the importance of understanding customer needs & expectations
Let’s imagine that you are growing a tomato plant. What will ensure that your plant grows big, red tomatoes?
Only if a business can understand its customer needs and expectations, it can achieve the following:
Firstly you need to understand the needs of the plant. Next you provide proper care for the plant. If you grow plants with love, care and passion, you will be rewarded with a rich harvest. Isn’t it?
The same logic applies to customers too!
Knowing and understanding customer needs is the key of every successful business. Caring for customers is key to growing your business!
Repeated Sales
Stay Updated
The basic reason to understand the customer’s needs is to provide them with what they need. That makes the customer happy. Customers who love your product/service are likely to promote you to similar customers in the market.
Building Trust
Be a Competitor
375
Imagine that you are a regular and happy customer of a vegetable shop near your home. How will you help the vegetable business to grow?
Let’s learn about how to identify customer needs Identifying customer needs is simple. Check about the following five areas with customers:
Price - What is the price range customers have.
Quality – What kind of quality do the customers need
Choice – What kind of product or service does the customer like. For ex., colors, material, feel which customers like
Experience - What kind of customer service will make the customer feel good?
Convenience – What kind of use is the customer looking for? For ex., do they want a shoe to walk in rainy season or football shoes?
Think and write down from your experience as a customer How your need was identified and fulfilled while buying a product or service?
Let’s learn how to practice probing with customers
Probing is a way to understand the customer’s needs and emotions by asking the right questions and to deliver a better service. To practice effective probing with customers, we can follow funnel technique.
376
1. Open Questions
Ask questions that help to understand the feelings, thoughts and opinions of a customer. This will help to continue the conversation further.
Ex: What are you looking for? Are you buying for yourself or is it a gift?
2. Probing Questions
These questions help us to go deeper into the conversation and give more clarity on the customer needs and expectations.
Ex: What is your budget range? What is the age of the person you are buying for?
3. Closed Questions
These questions are asked to get particular information or a specific detail.
Ex: Will this product suit your needs? Do you think your friends will like this product?
You are a customer in the National Clothes Center. You are buying a dress for your sister. Your classmate is the salesperson of the dress shop. Practice probing questions. Enact in front of your class. Write down the various questions you will use in the role play.
Activity Time!
What I learnt today:
Put a if you know this topic well.
1. Understanding customer needs is the key to a successful
business.
2. Understanding customer needs will help in sales, building
trust and staying updated with market trends.
3.
Identify customer needs by checking about - price, quality, choice, convenience, experience.
4. Probing is a great way to check customer needs.
5. Probing: Open questions ->Probing questions -> Closed
questions
377
11.4 Simple Techniques for Communicating with Customers
In this lesson you will learn :
1.
Importance of using selling techniques
2. Using simple selling techniques: FAB & Cross Selling
3. Selling to Customers
Put a on the correct option. The selling technique should be based on:
Thinking Box
Customer needs
Our choice
Let’s learn about the importance of using selling techniques All businesses require some type of selling. Customers can sense if a salesperson is dishonest or not confident. That is why it is important to earn their trust and build a relationship.
You must practice your voice tone, body language(maintaining eye contact) and closing a sale after making your pitch.
Selling techniques help us in building a relationship with the customer and making sure that they make a purchase.
We should practice a few things to be able to make a successful sale. Put a tick for the correct options:
Voice tone
Cooking
Eye contact
Body language
Chatting with friends
Using simple selling techniques
Here are two simple selling techniques every salesperson should know and practice:
FAB
Cross Selling
FAB: FAB is a logical approach that helps a customer to discover the product or service.
378
Features
Advantages
Benefits
The characteristics of a product or service, which can be Technical, Physical or Descriptive
The actual functionality of features in a product or service
The usefulness and the improvement that customer can get it by using the product or service
1. Provides a clear idea on the benefits of the product or
service.
2. Helps customers make better choices.
3.
Increases the sales and profit for the business.
Let’s learn how to practice FABing.
By identifying FAB of the product or service we can start writing the FAB
statement for our sales. It has 3 easy steps.
List down all the features of a product or service.
Write down one or two advantages of each feature.
Get into customers’ shoes and write a benefit statement.
Product Name: Smart Phone
Features
Advantages
Benefits

4000 mAh battery

Long lasting battery
More power storage

Fingerprint sensor

Security

Personalized lock

120 megapixel camera
Good pictures

Capturing more image
Wireless charging

64 GB RAM & 2.0 GHz processor
Handy charging

Fast processing


Charge battery without cable and plug
Running apps to store their data & processing speed
The FAB statement for the above smartphone.
“The long lasting battery with 4000 mAH will help you to use the mobile for whole day with just one time wireless charging. The fast processor allows you to use multiple applications at same time. You can take beautiful pictures with 120 mega pixel camera. 64 GB RAM supports you with more storage capacity”.
Identify a product/service around you and write down a FAB statement for it
Product Name:
379
Features
Advantages
Benefits
Your FAB Sales Statement
Let’s learn about cross selling
Cross Selling is a sales technique that aims to market additional products to the customers.
Why cross selling
1. Adding value to the customer
2.
Increasing the overall revenue
3. Customer Engagement
How to do Cross Selling
1.
Identify related products and services suitable for cross selling.
2.
Identify suitable customers to cross sell the products and services.
3. Develop a cross selling promotions and suggestion plans.
380
Visit any nearby shop/market. Make a list of products or services that are sold using cross selling technique.
Activity Time!
What I learnt today:
Put a if you know this topic well.
1. You must practice voice tone, body language and closing a
sale for making a successful sale
2. Selling techniques help us in building a relationship with
the customer and making sure that they make a purchase.
3. A FAB Statement helps in explaining the Features (facts & specifications), Advantages (usefulness), and Benefits (functionality) of a product or service.
4. Cross Selling is a sales technique that aims to market
additional products to the customers.
11.5 Closing Sales and Customer Feedback
In this lesson you will learn :
1.
Importance of closing a sale or service
3. Customer feedback and Satisfaction
2. How to close a sale or service
What do you think the words “closing a sale” means? Use Google and find out more!
Thinking Box
381
Let’s learn how to close a sale or service
The battery life is longer than my previous phone
You can also get 5% discount upon return of your old phone
Closing a sale means the process of completing a sale.
Closing is the stage where the buyer commits to buy the product or service.
Closing techniques is an essential skill to become a better salesperson.
There are 2 major opportunities to close the sale. They are:
Select the statements which show closing the sale. Here are two statements
What are the features of this product?
I will buy this phone, it looks good.
Let’s learn how to close a sale or service There are many closing sales techniques. The 3 most important closing sales techniques are:
Now or never closes:
The sales person tells an exclusive benefit and creates a sense of urgency and moves the customer to make a decision to buy.
Example: “This offer exists only for today”
Summary closes:
The sales person keeps reminding the value and benefits of the product or the service in order to close the deal. Help the customer to visualize the points discussed by an impressive summary.
Example: “ So we have the SmartTV with wider screen, 5 years guarantee and with accessible service centers. When would be the good time to deliver?”
Question closes:
The sales person closes the sale in the form of a question. The question aims either for a closure or more information to understand the reason for not closing the sales.
Example:
Does this offer meet your expectations?
Is there a specific expectation that is not being met with this offer?
Do a Google search to find more closing sales techniques and write it below.
Closing Sales Techniques
382
Let’s learn about customer feedback and satisfaction
The easiest way to find the happiness and satisfactory level of a customer is by getting their opinion.
Customers sharing their experience and opinion about a product or service is called customer feedback.
The performance of a business is directly connected to customer satisfaction. So it is important that customers are happy to use the products or services delivered.
Customer feedback is important for the below said reasons:
Serves as a guide for the business
Improve products and services
Sign of valuing customer
Simple and effective ways to collect feedback from customers.
1. Ask for review on social media
3. Customer testimonial
2. Customer feedback survey
383
Have you ever done online shopping? Go to any online shopping portal (amazon/myntra/flipkart) and choose any item. Check out customer feedback in the reviews section and note down key experiences shared by customers.
Activity Time!
What I learnt today:
Put a if you know this topic well.
1. Closing sales technique is an essential skill for a
salesperson.
2. The 3 important closing techniques- Now or never close,
summary close, question close.
3. Customer satisfaction is the key to business growth.
4. Feedback helps us to understand the expectations of the
customer.
5. Simple and effective ways of getting feedback- review
through social media, customer surveys, and customer testimonials.
384
