
2.1 My Values and Ethics
In this lesson you will learn :
1. What are values & ethics
2. How ethics and values impact our behavior
3.
Identify my personal values
There are six basic values of our country. Checkbox the one you know.
Thinking Box
Right to equality
Right to freedom of religion
Right to freedom
Cultural and educational rights
Right against exploitation
Right to constitutional remedies
Let’s learn about ethics and values
Ethics means to decide what is right and wrong for a human conduct. Ethics is necessary to have a good society, where everyone feels safe and respected. Ethics is usually the same for the whole of society.
Example 1: Someone has mistakenly left their mobile phone on the bus. You immediately run to them to return it. This shows that you have ethics of honesty. Hence, you did the ‘right’ thing.
Example 2: You see a man beating another person. You get angry and stop the man from beating. You scold the beater for being violent. Then the beater tells you that the other person is a robber. Now, did you do the right thing or not?
Sometimes it’s not easy to know what is the ‘right’ thing to do. In such situations you can refer to the above six basic values of our country.
Values are the beliefs that guide or motivate our attitudes or actions. They show how a person thinks, feels and behaves at home, at work and in society. It desides the ‘character’ of a person. It is more personal than ethics.
For example, your value is to be punctual. You are always on time. But, there are times when you cannot be on time. Then, you feel bad for not living according to your values.
Every individual has their own values that are taught to them by their family, culture, religion etc. The values we have determine our behavior. If our value is to respect people - in our actions we will actually show respect to everyone irrespective of their gender, religion, caste, wealth, nationality etc.
27
Situation: A man and a woman are holding hands and walking down a street. A group of men started bullying them saying, “This is against our culture and we will not tolerate such activities in our society.” Discuss in a group, what is the right thing to do?
Let’s learn about how ethics and values impact our behavior
Our ethics and values form the pillars of our character. These are the six main pillars of character. The pillars of character support us just like pillars support our building and make it strong. This helps us make right decisions.
1. Be honest
2. Be reliable
3. Be loyal.
Trustworthiness
1. Be accountable.
2. Keep trying.
3. Always do your best.
4. Think before you act.
Responsibility
5. Use self control and be self disciplined.
1. Be kind and compassionate.
2. Show empathy.
3. Help others in need.
Caring
1. Respect public property.
2. Protect the environment.
3. Vote and abide by the law.
Citizenship
4. Act for the welfare of your society, country
and the world.
1. Be non-judgemental.
2. Make decisions based on facts.
3. Be open minded.
Fairness
4. Do not spread fake news
1. Be kind and respect all those who are different
from you despite their age, gender, sexuality, color, caste, religion or class.
Respect
2. Don’t hurt other people’s feelings.
28
Against each action or behavior mention the category of the ‘Pillar of Character’. (Note – some actions can be written under more than one pillar.)
Activity Time!
Action & behavior
Mention the category of ‘Pillar of Character’
Action & behavior
Mention the category of ‘Pillar of Character’
Action & behavior
Mention the category of ‘Pillar of Character’
Don’t forward fake news on social media. Verify from the right source.
Be considerate towards people with special needs.
Don’t be judgmental.
Do not play loud music or make noise in public places or at night.
Speak the truth
Don’t threaten, hit or hurt anyone
Keep your neighborhood clean.
Exercise your voting rights.
Follow the traffic rules
Volunteer with an NGO
Respect the laws of the country.
Use the golden words (please, thank you, sorry, excuse me).
Accept the other persons’ point of view.
Respect differences in language, culture, religion etc
Forgive others
Help elderly people/senior citizens
Be determined to complete your job in the right time.
Protect the environment
Don’t blame others or find faults with others.
Don’t cheat anyone
Don’t speak rudely
29
Let’s learn about ethics and values
Personal values are your beliefs that are very dear to you. Your personal values decide your day-to-day actions and guide you through your life.
Values define who we are. Personal values differ from person to person. You learn personal values from your culture, childhood, life experiences and other factors.
Steps to choose your personal values
1. Think of things that are most important in your life.
2. Remember the experiences where you felt very happy.
3.
Imagine what you would like to hear about yourself from others when you turn 60.
4. Think of things that you admire in others to discover your values.
Make your personal value tree from the list of values given below
Activity Time!
List of values
Achievement
Ambition
Fun
Generosity
Making a difference
Resilience
Risk-taking
Caring
Growth
Motivation
Safety
Charity
Happiness
Optimism
Security
Collaboration
Health
Open-minded
Self-control
Creativity
Honesty
Passion
Service
Curiosity
Humor
Perfection
Spirituality
Dependability
Individuality
Performance
Stability
Empathy
Encouragement
Enthusiasm
Innovation
Intelligence
Intuition
Personal development
Popularity
Success
Thankfulness
Traditionalism
Ethics
Excellence
Fairness
Family
Friendships
Flexibility
Joy
Kindness
Knowledge
Leadership
Learning
Love
Power
Professionalism
Punctuality
Quality
Recognition
Relationships
Understanding
Wealth
Well-being
Wisdom
Freedom
Loyalty
Reliability
30
What I learnt today:
Put a if you know this topic well.
1. Ethics is to decide what is right and wrong for a human
conduct. Values are the beliefs that guide or motivate our attitudes or actions. They show how a person thinks, feels and behaves at home, at work and in society. It desides the ‘character’ of a person.
2.
Our ethics and values form the pillars of our character. The six main pillars of character. The pillars of character support us just like pillars support our building and make it strong. This helps us make right decisions.
3. Personal values are your beliefs that are very dear to you.
Your personal values decide your day-to-day actions and guide you through your life.
31
2.2 Our Constitution: Guiding Principles
In this lesson you will learn :
1.
Introduction to the Indian constitution
2. Guiding principles of the constitution
3. Rights and duties as an Indian citizen
Republic Day of India is celebrated on 26th of January. Do you know why? Search on the internet (or ask someone) and write here.
Thinking Box
Let’s learn about our Constitution
Like every household, schools or sports has their set of rules similarly, every country has their own set of rules; we call it law.
The Constitution of India (Bhartiya Samvidhan) is like a rule book. It is made of laws and rules for the country. It also tells the rights and duties of its citizens. It helps to manage the country in a good and fair way. Did you know?
1. All countries have a Constitution.
The Constitution of India PREAMBLE
We the people of India, having solemnly resolved to constitute India into a [SOVEREIGN, SOCIALIST, SECULAR, DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC] and to secure to all its citizens:
2. The Constitution of India is the longest Constitution in the world.
JUSTICE, social, economic and political
LIBERTY of thought, expression, belief, faith and worship;
3. Dr. BR Ambedkar was the chairperson of the writing team.
EQUALITY of status and of opportunity; and to promote among them all
FRATERNITY assuring the dignity of the individual and the [unity and integrity of the Nation];
Preamble of the Indian constitution
The Preamble to the Constitution of India is a brief statement about the purpose and principles of the Constitution.
IN OUR CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY this twenty-sixth day of November, 1949 do HEREBY ADOPT, ENACT AND GIVE TO OURSELVES THIS CONSTITUTION.
WE, THE PEOPLE OF INDIA, having solemnly resolved to constitute India into a SOVEREIGN SOCIALIST SECULAR DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC and to secure to all its citizens:
It is a declaration that the people of India have defined themselves as free people (sovereign). That there is social and economic equality in this state and there will be no discrimination based on caste or gender. Everyone has equal rights and opportunities to get jobs and earn their livelihood.
32
Let’s learn about the guiding principles of The Indian Constitution
The guiding principles in our preamble are the characteristics of country, they are:
India is a SOVEREIGN country: this means India can make its own decision. Other countries do not make or affect the rules and decisions of India.
India is a SOCIALIST country: this means the government should give equal access to resources and opportunities to its citizens from all caste, religion, gender and financial status. The resources can include access to food, healthcare, clean environment and quality education.
India is a SECULAR country: this means that people from all religions or no religions are treated equally in our country.
India is a DEMOCRATIC country: this means that everyone is allowed to have different opinions and make their own choices. It gives equal respect to everyones’ opinions, thoughts and beliefs.
India is a REPUBLIC: this means that all the citizens have the freedom to vote for a leader who will represent them. One person, like a King or a Queen, does not hold all the power in a republic
Discuss in your group about examples of each principle. Take help from your teacher or search online.
Activity Time!
SOVEREIGN
Example: Choosing a Prime Minister or President of India. No other country effects this decision
SOCIALIST
SECULAR
DEMOCRATIC
REPUBLIC
33
Let’s learn about the rights and duties of an Indian citizen
Rights: things that we are morally and legally allowed to do.
1. Right to Equality - Ex: Every citizen in the country is equal before
law to each citizen irrespective of religion, language, age, caste, sex and gender.
2. Right to freedom - Ex: Freedom to practise any profession or to
carry on any occupation, trade or business
3. Right against exploitation - Ex: Prohibition of employment of
children
4. Right to freedom of religion - Ex: Every person is free to practice
any religion
5. Cultural and Educational Rights - Ex: The citizens can conserve
their culture, language or script
6. Right to Constitutional Remedies - Ex: A person can move to the Supreme court if he/she wants to get their fundamental rights protected.
Duties: Duty is a responsibility. You should do it for yourself and others. This makes you a good citizen.
Example: Parking your vehicle in the space given to you and not anywhere you want to, wearing a helmet while riding.
Read the statement written in the middle of the column. Put arrow to the correct boxes of either Rights and Duties
Activity Time!
Getting quality education
Paying taxes
Rights are the things we expect from our family, community and our country.
Getting clean water
Marrying anyone of your choice
Duties are the things we do for our family, community and our country.
Practice any religion
Dropping waste at proper govt. authorized locations only
34
What I learnt today:
Put a if you know this topic well.
1. The Indian constitution is a set of laws and rules for our
country which tells about the rights and duties of its citizens and helps the country run in a fair way.
2. There are 5 guiding principles; SOVEREIGN SOCIALIST
SECULAR DEMOCRATIC and REPUBLIC
3. We as citizens of India have our rights (mentioned in the
preamble also) and duties which we should be responsible for.
2.3 Protecting Our Environment
In this lesson you will learn :
1. What is environmental crisis?
2. Need for maintaining a sustainable environment
3. How to develop a green lifestyle
Circle the type of pollution you know about
Thinking Box
Water pollution
Air pollution
Sound pollution
Let’s learn about the causes of environmental problems
Have you ever wondered:
1. What happens to the garbage after it is collected by a garbage
truck?
2. Where does the garbage I see in a river or on the beach go?
3.
Is there a negative effect of cutting down trees?
The above problems lead to pollution. Pollution is when gases, smoke and chemicals enter the environment in large amounts and make it harmful for plants, animals and humans.
In recent times, these environmental problems of pollution have become very serious. As per scientific studies, the harmful effects cannot be changed. This has led to an environmental crisis.
Let’s look at some of the major problems that have caused this environmental crisis.
35
Environmental problems
Causes
Land Pollution
Solid and liquid waste disposed of in landfills and chemical wastes that pollute the earth’s surface.
Air pollution
Exhaust from vehicles and smoke from industries and factories, burning of fuels, etc.
Water pollution
Water gets polluted with paints, plastics and chemicals released from industries and other human activities.
Deforestation
Forests are destroyed by cutting trees for agriculture and housing purposes.
Soil erosion
When dirt or soil washes away by water, wind, and other natural forces.
What are some of the environmental problems in your region?
Pollution has various negative effects on the health of plants, animals, people and the planet. Let’s examine the major effects of environmental problems today:
Ozone depletion
The thinning of the ozone layer is due to the release of poisonous gases like CFC’s in the atmosphere. This causes severe damage to human health.
36
Global warming
Global warming happens when carbon dioxide (greenhouse gas) and other air pollutants collect in the atmosphere. This leads to a rise in earth’s temperature
Loss of Biodiversity
Climate change, pollution, hunting of animals and destruction of their shelter results in death of many precious plants and animals
Long-term effects on human health
Humans are at increased risk of many diseases due to pollution - heart, diseases, lung congestion, cancer and lesser life expectancy.
We need to maintain our environment to create a safe life for all living beings on this planet; and for future generations.
What are the common effects of pollution in your locality?
Let’s learn how to develop a green lifestyle
Protecting the environment is our responsibility. How can we adopt an eco-friendly lifestyle in our day-to- day life? Here are some green habits you can adopt to save the planet. In order to make simple changes to live a greener, sustainable life, We must:
Use bicycles and public transportation.
Avoid chemical pesticides and fertilisers.
Save electricity by turning off appliances and lights.
Reduce the amount of plastic waste.
Carry reusable cloth/paper bags when shopping.
Recycle cans, bottles, paper, books, and even utensils.
Plant trees and encourage others to do so.
37
What are methods you will follow to adopt a green lifestyle?
Geeta and Noor are good friends. They decided to grow a vegetable garden behind their houses. They found out that giving fertiliser would help the plants grow better. Geeta collected cow dung from a milkman. Noor went to a nearby shop to buy fertiliser. Both were happy to see vegetables in their garden.
Activity Time!
Who do you think followed a more environmentally friendly method? Why?
What I learnt today:
Put a if you know this topic well.
1. Pollution has negative effects on the health of plants,
animals, people and the planet
2. We need to maintain our environment to create a safe life
for everyone
3. We can reduce unnecessary waste by following - reduce,
reuse and recycle
4. We can save the planet by adopting green habits like -
recycling, planting trees, saving water etc.
38
