
3.1 21st Century Employability
Skills
In this lesson you will learn :
1.
Introduction to the 21st century
2. How to assess your skills?
3. Making a plan for your skill development.
By now, you must have understood the term ‘Employability Skills’. You might know that in cricket a batter scores 100 runs, which is called a ‘century’. Similarly 100 years is also called a century. The period between the years 2000-2100 is called the 21st century.
Thinking Box
What are the 3 main ways in which people learn differently in the 21st century?
1.
2.
3.
Let’s learn about 21st century employability skills
What is industrial revolution?
Industrial revolution is the way in which major changes take place in the way manufacturing happens. Over different centuries, the process of manufacturing various goods has changed due to technology and scientific development. We may think this is a small change. But, it’s not. Every time there has been an industrial revolution, people’s way of life has completely changed.
For e.g., Our grandparents, in their childhood, used to play with handmade toys. As time passed, few industries started making toys with the help of machines. Through machines, toys were produced in large quantities.
What types of toys did you or your friends have in your childhood?
Handmade Machine made
39
Let us understand the 4 major industrial revolutions.
1st Industrial revolution
2nd Industrial revolution
3rd Industrial revolution
4th Industrial revolution (also called Industry 4.0)
Started in 18th century.
Started in 19th century.
Started in 20th century.
Started in 21st century.
Things developed: Cotton mills, steam engines trains
Things developed: Electricity, mass production of clothes, cars & other goods
Things developed: Computers, Internet, machines for simple human jobs like ATM
Things developed: Robots for human jobs, Internet based jobs, Entire world connected through internet and technology
We all are here
Select the skills or tasks that are most relevant in the 21st century to be employable.
Skills for job/task
Skills for job/task
Typing skills
Critical thinking and Problem-solving
Hardware skills
Computer programming languages
Wood cutting skills
Physical strength
Needle work & weaving
Logical reasoning
Digital fluency
Communication skills
Basic computer skills
Teamwork and collaboration
Entrepreneurial skills
Time management skills
Creative thinking
Data scientists
Blacksmith
Self-learning skills
Let’s learn about how to assess your skills
Regular checking or assessment of your skills is necessary for the growth of your career. Here are the different ways to assess your skills.
Hard Skills
Soft Skills
Step 1: Make a list of your hard and soft skills. Ex:
60 words per minute typing speed
Quick Learner
40
Step 2: Identify gaps in your skillset.
Ex: I need to learn MS excel.
Step 3: Research on the skills which are in demand in your trade. You can do this by researching the big companies in your trade - understand what skills are trending today.
Ex: You can use online search engine (like Google) to search “skills required for a civil draughtsperson’s jobs”

Create your resume and do self-reflection

Ask other people for feedback on your work

Take an Online Behavior Test
Let’s make a plan for your skill development We usually think that a person can be intelligent or not intelligent. We decide this based on marks in school or college. But that is not true! There are 8 types of intelligence or smartness!
Someone can be weak in mathematics, but can be very strong with physical skills (playing sports, weightlifting, yoga etc). Someone who is weak in language skills, maybe very good in musical skills. So, next time someone asks you your strengths, you can tell them based on these 8 types of smartness!
A I T A P S - L A U S
I
V
L M
L
A
N
O
Picture Smart
S
R
E
U SI C
P
A
R
Music Smart
T
Self Smart
A
NATURALISTIC IN
L
B O D I L Y -KINESTHETIC IN
Multiple Intelligences
Nature Smart
Body Smart
People Smart
Logic Smart
ICAL
Word Smart
T
A
T
EM
E
R
P
ATH
E
R
S
O
GICAL-M
N
A
L
O
V
C L
E
R
B
N G U I S T I
A L -
L I
With the help of the statements below, you can check what type of intelligence or smartness you have. Select the statements which you relate with the most, in all the categories.
Picture Smart
Word Smart
Logic Smart
Body Smart
Characteristics:
Characteristics:
Characteristics:
Characteristics:
Read and write for enjoyment
Remember written and spoken information
Have excellent problem-solving skills
Are skilled at dancing and sports
41
Are good at putting puzzles together
Interpret pictures, graphs, and charts well
Enjoy drawing, painting, and the visual arts
Enjoy reading and writing
Debate or give persuasive speeches
Are able to explain things well
Use humor when telling stories
Enjoy thinking about abstract ideas
Like conducting scientific experiments
Can solve complex computations
Enjoy creating things with their hands
Have excellent physical coordination
Remember by doing, rather than hearing or seeing
Recognize patterns easily
Music Smart
People Smart
Self Smart
Nature Smart
Characteristics:
Characteristics:
Characteristics:
Characteristics:
Enjoy singing and playing musical instruments
Recognize musical patterns and tones easily
Remember songs and melodies
Have a rich understanding of musical structure, rhythm, and notes
Communicate well verbally
Are skilled at non-verbal communication
See situations from different perspectives
Create positive relationships with others
Resolve conflicts in group settings
Analyze their strengths and weaknesses well
Enjoy analyzing theories and ideas
Have excellent self-awareness
Understand the basis for his or her own motivations and feelings
Are interested in subjects such as botany, biology, and zoology
Categorize and catalog information easily
Enjoy camping, gardening, hiking, and exploring the outdoors
Dislikes learning unfamiliar topics that have no connection to nature
Q1. So, which one (or more) is your area of smartness?
Activity Time!
Q2. Can you think of careers where you can make use of your smart areas?
42
What I learnt today:
Put a if you know this topic well.
1. 21st century employability skills refer to the various skills
that are critically important to be successfully employed in today’s world. Example: Digital Skills, interpersonal skills, life skills and career skills.
2. Regular assessment of your skills is vital for the furthering
of your career.
3. Developing our skills for the career we choose will help us
grow in our jobs or business.
3.2 Know Yourself
In this lesson you will learn :
1. What it means to ‘know yourself’
2. What are strengths?
3. How to describe qualities, abilities and talents
The top 5 things I do very well are :
1.
Thinking Box
2.
3.
4.
5.
Let’s learn about what is meant by “know yourself”
Knowing yourself is having a clear idea of your own self - your personality. It includes strengths, weaknesses, thoughts, beliefs, motivation, values and aspirations. It can shape our personal and professional life ahead. We can build on our strengths and also identify areas to improve.
If we know what we are good at, we can identify the right career opportunities. And, when we understand our areas of improvement, we will always keep learning and growing!
43
Ability
Interest

Things that we are good at doing

Activities you like to do

Things that other people recognize as our qualities


Things that make you happy
Something that you do in your free time!

Things that people often ask us to help with
We can always acquire new abilities and interests. There are many things that we have never tried yet. As our life experience grows, our abilities and interests also grow.
My identity Think about your life and answer the questions. You can choose to write about it, draw it out, create a poem about it, etc. Be as creative as possible.
1. My name is
2. Sex
3. Age
4. What is the best quality about me?
5. What do I like to do in my free time?
Let’s learn about what are strengths?
Having a clear understanding of your strengths and weaknesses will help you create a life-goal. Strengths are qualities and skills that are considered positive. It helps you grow well in life and career. You could have got it naturally, or you could have cultivated and built it over the years, through your experiences. For example, good memory, good communication, good mathematical calculation, kindness, politeness, friendliness are all personal strengths. Weaknesses are lack of strengths or an inability to do something well. Everyone has a set of weaknesses. With hard work you can learn to overcome your weaknesses and turn it into a strength.
What are your strengths and weaknesses?
My strengths and weaknesses
Observe yourself well and identify your personal strengths and weaknesses in the chart below. Also, write about how you will overcome these weaknesses.
My Strengths
My Weaknesses
How will I overcome my weaknesses?
44
Let’s learn how to describe my qualities, abilities and talents
In most job interviews, you will be asked to describe your qualities, abilities and talents. You may follow the given tips to describe the qualities:
1. Prepare your answer before the interview
2. Note down a list of 5-6 abilities or skills you possess
3. Highlight the most important and relevant skills for the job
4. Mention qualities that make you unique
5. Provide examples to support the skills you mention
Q1. Identify your strengths.
Activity Time!
Tick/circle the qualities, talents or skills that you have. If you wish to add any skills to the list, write your skills in the blank space provided below.
Quality
Talent
Skill/Ability
Honest
A good painter
A good leader
Caring
A singer
A good cook
Hard Working
A magician
Use computer
Innovative
An actor
Speak English
Career Focused
A director
Drive well
Loyal
An artist
Play ____________ (any sport)
Q2. Complete the following statements with your identified in previous activity.
1. My name is
(Write your first name and last name.)
2. I am
(Write 2 to 3 strengths from the list above, or something else)
45
3. I am
(Write 1 or 2 weakness from the list above, or something else)
4. I will
(Write 1 or 2 ways to overcome weakness from the list above, or something else)
What I learnt today:
Put a if you know this topic well.
1. Knowing yourself will help you find out your interests,
abilities and the right career opportunities.
2. Strengths are positive qualities and skills that will help
you grow in your life and career.
3. You can overcome your weaknesses with hard work
4. Describing your strengths and skills is necessary during
job interviews.
3.3 Behaviour and Attitude
In this lesson you will learn :
1. What are behavioural skills?
3. Motivating yourself to do better.
2. Developing a positive attitude.
Sapna was walking towards her college. 3 boys teased Sapna in a bad way. Sapna got angry and slapped 1 boy. Mr. Raju was walking on the other side of the road and saw Sapna slap the boy. He thought “This girl has such bad behaviour.”
Thinking Box
Unlike Mr. Raju, you know the full story. Think and answer. What do you think is good behaviour and bad behaviour?
46
Let’s understand what behavioural skills are
Behavioural skills simply means the way we interact, manage and deal with our external environment. It includes how to act around people, places and situations.
Behavioural skills are understood by our actions. It can be seen by us and others.
Here are a few of the very important behavioural skills (these are also known as 21st century skills):
1. Communication: Includes speaking skills, listening skills, body language and writing skills. How we
communicate can make or break our relationship with others.
2. Self-Improvement: Knowing our own self is very important to improve ourselves. Self-improvement is a skill we use to continuously make ourselves better at what we do. It helps us set high goals and achieve them.
3. Time Management: These skills can help you organize your work efficiently so you can complete your
tasks on time.
4. Conflict Resolution: Conflict happens when two people do not agree or have a fight over something.
The way we manage/solve the problem is called conflict resolution.
5. Decision-Making: When we have many good options, it is hard to decide. For example, deciding about your career path, deciding whom to marry can be big decisions in life. Learning how to decide big or small decisions can help in our behavior skills.
6. Problem-Solving: A person who can solve a problem well has a great gift in life! Solving problems can
help with excellent behavior in personal life and the workplace.
Give marks to yourself on the 6 skills below. Out of 10, how well do you know these skills? Ask a close friend to also mark you, so you get an idea of how people see you! Here is an example to help you:
You
Your friend
Example:
Communication
4/10
6/10
You
Your friend
Communication
Self-Improvement
Activity:
Time Management
Conflict Resolution
Decision-Making
Problem-Solving
47
Let’s understand how to develop a positive attitude
Behavioural skills are visible to others. But, attitude is in our minds. Attitude is what we think about something or someone. Our attitude plays a huge part in how we look at life. It shapes how we react to the things that happen to us. We can’t control what happens to us. But we can develop a positive attitude to deal with the situations in your personal and professional life.
You can find various creative ways to keep a positive attitude. Here are a few suggestions:

Enjoy small pleasures (eating something nice, looking at a beautiful flower, etc.)

Try and adapt to change easily and quickly (what you cannot change, you accept.)

Find the positive in negative situations (if you lose your purse, try to understand what you can learn from it.)

Frame the problem in a positive way (You fell from your new bike. Bike is badly scratched and you are bleeding. Instead of thinking of it as a huge problem, you understand that things could have been worse. You could have had a fracture!)

Value yourself and find inspiration (you have problems because you are capable of handling them! Find inspiration from how well you have overcome your problems in the past.)
Everyone has good days and bad days in life. Take your time and think back to a really good day you had and give a reason as to why it was a good day.
Let’s understand how to motivate ourselves to do better
We might have either heard or experienced the above mentioned things. This is a common problem we all face. We can request others to help us, but they can only help for a short period of time. The only solution to such a problem is - self-motivation.
Self-motivation or the ability to motivate yourself is an important skill. It pushes us to achieve our goals, feel more fulfilled and improve our overall quality of life.
I set my alarm for 6am everyday… But I don’t get up!
Motivating yourself could start with few very simple tips:

Just start: The secret of achieving big goals is, starting them!

Break down tasks into small steps.
Make a promise to yourself. Give yourself a
prize when you achieve it.

Be kind and loving to yourself.
I have a proper list of all the things to do… But I am just not doing them!
I have set goals and love my goals… But I am not working towards achieving them
Make a pact with a friend to achieve goals
together.

Ask people to share their stories of growth.
48
Attitude
Goals
Success
What are a few steps you follow to keep yourself motivated?
MOTIVATION
Performance
Idea
Support
You CANNOT learn behavioural skills by just reading or listening to good tips. Here are some ways to learn and practice these skills:
Activity Time!
Tip: Search online to understand more about these skills
and how to learn them.
Skill
What can YOU do to learn this?
How can YOUR Employability Skills FACILITATOR help?
How can YOUR FRIENDS help?
Communication
Self-Improvement
Time Management
Conflict Resolution
Decision-Making
Problem-Solving
49
What I learnt today:
Put a if you know this topic well.
1. The way we interact with others and respond to certain
situations shows our behavioral skills.
2. We can develop a positive attitude to deal with the situations in your personal and professional life.
3. Motivation pushes us to achieve our goals, feel more
fulfilled and improve our overall quality of life
3.4 Critical Thinking & Decision
Making
In this lesson you will learn :
1. What is critical thinking?
3. Practice decision making
2. How to make decisions
Which of the following statements are true for YOU :
Thinking Box
Statement
Yes/No
I can solve all problems in my life easily
I need the support of my family/friends to make decisions
I can take decisions on my own
Let’s learn about What is critical thinking?
Critical thinking is a way of thinking to solve a problem. It helps us to find out if something told to us is the truth or not.
For example,
Imagine that your uncle tells you ‘We can never learn without books’. You can do critical thinking about this by asking,

Is that really true?
How else can we learn?
What happens if we learn without books?
50
This way, you can examine a particular problem based on facts. The best practice is to think critically by asking many questions, not just believing everything you hear or see.
Let’s look at another example. Imagine that you are a mechanic, a customer has called you to fix their car that has broken down in the middle of the road. Which of following things would you take with you to attend to the customer:
The following are the steps we follow during critical thinking.
Critical thinking is the process of understanding information available, seeking answers and coming to a conclusion.
Why do you think critical thinking is important?
Let’s learn about how to make decisions
Decision making is a process of choosing between two or more options. We make a lot of decisions in our everyday life. Using a step-by-step decision-making process can help you make a thoughtful decision. Critical thinking can help you to make better decisions.
Steps followed in decision making:
Decision making
Identify problem
Generate options
Select best option
Implement decision
Evaluate and learn from decisions
51
Let us look at how Priya makes her decision about her career.
I am confused about what ITI course to pursue. I like to draw and paint, it makes me very happy.
My uncle says that working in the field of computers is very good. You could learn data entry and programming, become an office assistant or learn Desktop Publishing.
I decided to pursue Desktop Publishing to become a graphic designer. It is the best option for me as I can learn digital art. This helps me follow my passions too.
How did you make a decision to pursue this course at your ITI?
Let’s practice decision making
After your ITI course, you get a job in a different state, your family is happy that you have a job but don’t want you to move to a different state. Now use the steps for decision making to find a solution to your problem.
Step 1: Identify the problem.
Step 2: What are your options?
Step 3: What is the best option for you?
52
Step 4: How will you implement this option?
Step 5: What did you learn from this decision?
Divide up into pairs and practice decision-making in different situations. Use critical thinking and logic to make decisions.
Activity Time!
Problem 1: Should you take a job or continue studying after my your ITI course?
Problem 2: Which career pathway is best for you?
Problem 3: You have joined a new job and in the first week you feel like you don’t enjoy the work. What will you do?
What I learnt today:
Put a if you know this topic well.
1. Critical thinking is the act of using logic to understand the
truth.
2. Decision making is a process of choosing between two or
more options.
3. The five logical steps to follow to make decisions are:
• Generating options •
Identifying problems
Selecting the best option
•
Implementing decision Learning from decision
53
3.5 Time Management in
the Workplace
In this lesson you will learn :
1. What is time management?
3. How to manage time in everyday life.
2. Why is time management important?
Mark the time management tips that you follow.
I plan in advance
I do the important tasks first
Thinking Box
I turn off my phone to focus on task
I reward myself for completing tasks
I take a break between task
I create a to-do list every day
I set weekly and monthly goals
I set a time limit before I start any task
Let’s learn about time Management
Have you ever thought about:
Submit this homework by Friday
Why did you have a timetable in school to learn different subjects?
Why do your teachers give you a timeline for homework submission?
These practices help you learn how to manage your time!
Time management is the process of organizing and planning your activities to make the best possible use of your time. Good time management helps you to work smarter. It is important to balance your time between different activities.
Time management helps you:
1. Complete tasks on time
2. Set and achieve daily goals
3. Reduce stress
4.
Improve performance of tasks
5. Do more in less time
54
What do you understand from the word “time management”?
Let’s learn about the importance of time management
Ram is pursuing an Interior Designing course from ITI Vivek Vihar, Delhi. He wants to learn painting by taking an extra course. However, he is not able to learn painting due to lack of time. What should Ram do?
Leave painting classes
Take out an hour by managing his time properly
If Ram decides to leave his painting class, he is losing a good opportunity to grow his career. The reason we often say “I don’t have time” is because we are too comfortable in our daily life or even lazy to work harder. Everyone has the same 24 hours. People with ambition and vision, MAKE time to achieve either goals.
Time management is one of the most important skills as a professional. In today’s world of work, work pressure is high. We have to achieve high targets in a short period of time. Without time management, we cannot perform our job well.
By good time management in the workplace you can:
1. Learn more skills than others
2. Grow in your career
3. Support your team’s growth
4.
Improve your performance at work
5. Meet work deadlines
6. Achieve better work-life balance
What do you understand by the term work-life balance? Why do you think it is important?
Let’s learn ways to manage time in our daily lives If you feel like you don’t have enough time to do everything you wish to, better time management techniques may help you. These are a few tips for managing time in daily life.
Set a goal for yourself
List out all the tasks to achieve this goal.
55
Create a daily planner
Give each task a time limit
Set reminders for all your tasks
Block out distractions
Establish routine
Pomodoro Technique
Pick a task
Set the timer to 25 minutes
Get to work
A list should be planned ahead of time.
Although a mechanical timer is suggested, any type will do
No distractions allowed!
Stop when time is up
Record Progress
Take a five-minute break
This block of work time is called a POMODORO.
Make note of anything that could aid future improvement
Breaks keep you fresh
Get back to work
After the fourth Pomodoro take a longer break (15-30 minutes)
Continue likewise until calling it a day
And repeat previous steps
Squeeze in mindless chores for increased productivity
With such focus and flow, time is used more efficiently while reducing mental fatigue.
56
Think about the past three days and fill in the activities that you commonly do in the given time! This is only for your own reflection. Write activities in as much detail as possible.
Activity Time!
Time
Activities
7:00 AM
8:00 AM
9:00 AM
10:00 AM
11:00 AM
12:00 PM
1:00 PM
2:00 PM
3:00 PM
4:00 PM
5:00 PM
6:00 PM
7:00 PM
8:00 PM
9:00 PM
10:00 PM
11:00 PM
1. If you had to save 2 hours (120 minutes) each day,
which activities would you want to avoid? List them.
57
2. What is the one new skill you will learn if you get
2 hours more time, daily?
What I learnt today:
Put a if you know this topic well.
1. Time management is the process of organizing and planning your activities and tasks to make the best possible use of your time.
2. Time management is important in your daily life and your
workplace.
3. The first step to managing your time well is setting goals
for yourself.
4. Pomodoro Technique is a simple time management
technique of setting small goals and taking short breaks.
3.6 Problem Solving
In this lesson you will learn :
1. Techniques of creative problem solving
2. Practicing problem solving
How would you define a problem in your own words?
Thinking Box
58
Let’s learn about techniques of creative problem solving
Problem solving means finding a solution to any problem. All of us solve problems every day.
Sometimes, we get confused about how to solve a problem.
Problem solving in day to day life
The following steps can be helpful!
1. Identify the problem
2. Break down the problem into parts
5. Apply the solution and test what happens
3. Find solutions to the different parts of the problem
6. As we solve more problems, we will get better at problem solving.
4. Select the best set of solutions
7. If the solution is not working, try another way
Problem solving
Why is problem solving important in day to day life?
Let’s practice problem solving
Let’s solve some problems together!
Step 1
Step 2
Step 3
Make a team with any 3 trainees from your class.
Together, decide a common problem that has been bothering you all for some time – it can be something in your institute, or about your studies or something in your town.
Think of the problem solving wheel. Make a plan to solve the problem. Follow up to step 6 of the problem solving process.
For example, transport problems, low-speed internet, unclean toilets.
59
Step 1: Identify the problem
What is the problem that you will work on?
Step 2: Break down the problem into parts
What are the different problems within the problem? For example if your problem is - I don’t know which job to choose. One part of the problem is, you do not know what you are interested in. Another part is, you do not have enough information about the jobs available for your qualification.
Step 3: Find solutions to the different parts of the problem
How will you solve all the parts of the problem? A problem has many parts and each part needs to be solved, to solve the problem as a whole.
Step 4: Generate solutions
Brainstorming time! Think of what you can do to solve this problem.
Step 5: Select the best solutions
Select the solution as a team.
Step 6: Plan implementation
How will you execute it!?
Identify a problem in your day to day life. Now write down how you can solve that problem using problem solving skills. All the best!
Activity Time!
60
What I learnt today:
Put a if you know this topic well.
1. Problem solving means finding a solution to any problem.
2.
Identifying problems is the crucial step in problem solving.
3. Breaking down the problem into parts helps to address the
problem.
61
