
4.1 Motivation to learn English
In this lesson you will learn :
1. The importance of English
2. Simple and fun ways to learn English
Name the top 3 reasons why you want to learn or improve your English
Thinking Box
1.
2.
3.
Let’s learn the importance of the English Language
Here are 4 reasons how learning English can improve your life:
1. English is a common language
English is a global language used to communicate with people from different parts of the world. For example, at work, if you meet someone from Japan or Germany, or even a different state in India, English is a common language for communication.
2. English can help you get a better job
In an interview, if you can communicate in English, you will have an advantage over others. International companies prefer to hire people who know English.
3. Using internet and social media platforms effectively
These days all information and news is online, and all that is in English. Even Social Media platforms are in English. Of course, translation is available, but it does not always convey the message correctly. Knowledge of English can help you use the internet and social media platforms effectively.
4. English can make life fun
Knowledge of English gives you access to a wonderful world of entertainment! You can watch English films, shows, news, videos, etc. and enrich your life.
Learning English is necessary for all of us. Communicating clearly and correctly is important in the classroom and at the workplace.
It helps us participate in a wide range of activities. So let’s set a goal to learn English successfully!
62
Goal - To communicate confidently in English
Every day is a chance to become better!
Make an attractive poster with this goal and keep it in your notebook or put it up at home.
If you become better at speaking English, how will your life improve?
1.
2.
3.
Let’s learn some simple and fun ways of learning English
Learning English is an opportunity to learn and grow. It is something to be proud of!
Here are a few enjoyable ways to learn English.
1. Listen to the English language. Watch English films or shows, and listen
to English songs, podcasts, news, etc.
2. Find a friend to practice speaking in English. Set an ‘English Only’ rule
when you speak to each other.
3. Read everything you see. If you look around, you will find that there are
many things to read - from magazines to pamphlets to movie subtitles.
Hi, how are you?
I’m fine. How are you?
Don’t be afraid to make mistakes. If you are struggling with complicated words, or a difficult sentence, look up Google for the meaning and pronunciation.
Keep practicing and you will surely succeed!
63
Building confidence means recognizing what you are good at. Give yourself three compliments!
Activity Time!
(For example, if someone asks your best friend what they liked about you, what would they say? Write that down)
1.
2.
3.
Wow! You are truly awesome!
Write 2 specific things you will do in the next 30 days to improve your English.
1.
2.
What I learnt today:
Put a if you know this topic well.
1. English is a global language for communication
2. Knowledge of English is important to get a job
3. English allows us to use the internet and social
media effectively
4. There are many fun ways of learning English
5. Every day is a chance to become better
64
4.2 Naming Words
In this lesson you will learn :
1. The meaning of Naming Words or Common Nouns
2. Naming words that have different meanings
Circle everything that you may see in a market
Thinking Box
Shops Vegetables A Dog A Cat Birds Cycle
Auto rickshaw Fruits Fish Shopkeeper
Let’s learn the importance of Naming Words
Imagine that you and I are going for a walk. We step out and we are walking on a nice, beautiful road.
Let’s look at the picture and discuss what we see!
We see a wide road. There is a school, and next to it a bank. A bus drives past us. We see the bus driver wearing a brown shirt. There is a small boy in front of the school. He’s playing with two cats. We look up at the sky. There are many clouds. We can also see a crow flying.
What did we see?
We saw people, places, animals and things. Then we pointed at them and named them! Here are the words that we used to name them.
Person
Place
Animal/Bird
Thing
bus driver
road
cats
bus
boy
school
crow
shirt
bank
clouds
These are naming words. Any word that you use to name a person, place, animal or thing, is a naming word. They are also called ‘Common Nouns’
65
Naming Words
name
thing
animal
place
Here is a classroom. What people, places, animals and things can you see in the classroom? Write down their naming words.
Person
Place
Animal/Bird
Thing
Let’s learn about a few words that are the same, but have different meanings
There are some naming words which have two meanings. These words name two completely different things.
Let’s look at a few examples
1. Bat
2. Date
1. Bats fly at night.
1. What is the date today?
2. Cricket bats are made with willow wood.
2. Dates are very nutritious.
66
3. Letter
4. Feet
1. There are 26 letters in the English alphabet.
1. We should wash our feet before going to bed.
2. I wrote a complaint letter to the office.
2. Suresh is 4 feet tall.
Label the pictures using these naming words. There are two pictures that match each word.
Activity Time!
1. Nail
2. Wave
What I learnt today:
Put a if you know this topic well.
1. Naming words or common nouns are words given to
people, animals, birds, places, and things
2. Some naming words like bat, letter, feet, date, nail, wave
have two different meanings
67
4.3 Naming Words - Singular and Plural
In this lesson you will learn :
1. The difference between singular and plural forms of naming words
2. Using the singular and plural forms correctly
Identify the following naming words as person, place,
animal/bird, or thing :
Thinking Box
Grandmother -
Computer -
Basket -
Cabinet -
Goat -
Delhi -
Pigeon -
Home -
Baby -
Let’s learn the singular and plural forms of naming words
Draw some clouds
What is the difference between the word “cloud” and “clouds”?
Cloud is the naming word for one cloud. It is a singular naming word. The word clouds talks about more than one cloud. It is a plural naming word.
Now, draw a cloud
Singular words are used when there is one person, place, animal or thing to name. For example - teacher, park, puppy, dress Plural words are used when there is more than one person, place, animal or thing to name.
For example - teachers, parks, puppies, dresses
68
Look at the picture. Check if the naming word is singular (one) or plural (many)
Singular (one)
Singular (one)
Singular (one)
Plural (many)
Plural (many)
Plural (many)
Let’s learn the correct usage of singular and plural naming words
Let’s look at some of the most common naming words - both the singular words and the plural words.
Some words are spelt differently in the plural form. Here are a few common examples
For most naming words, we add ‘s’ or ‘es’, to make it plural
Singular Words (one)
Plural Words (many)
Singular Words (one)
Plural Words (many)
1. Bag
1. Bags
1. Person
1. People
2. Computer
2. Computers
2. Man/Woman
2. Men/Women
3. Class
3. Classes
3. Child
3. Children
4. Box
4. Boxes
4. Tooth
4. Teeth
5. Mango
5.
Mangoes
5.
Foot
5.
Feet
While using these naming words in a sentence, think carefully if you’re talking about one or about many.
1. Person/People

There is a young person sitting in the classroom. ‘Person’ talking about one - singular

There are a few people waiting for me in the hall. ‘People’ talking about many - plural
2. Year/Years

It will take a year for me to finish this course. ‘Year’ talking about one - singular

The builders took around 20 years to finish the Taj Mahal. ‘Years talking about many - plural
3. Week/Weeks

I have to go to the doctor next week. ‘week’ talking about one - singular.

I have three weeks to study for the test. ‘weeks’ talking about many - plural.
4. Man/Men

A man in the shop is buying some biscuits. ‘Man’ talking about one - singular.

Five men walked into the bank. ‘Men’ talking about many - plural.
69
5. Tooth/Teeth

I have to see a dentist because my tooth is hurting. ‘Tooth’ talking about one - singular.

A dentist is a doctor who looks after our teeth. ‘Teeth’ talking about many - plural.
Match the correct word to the correct picture.
Activity Time!
Man (one)
mouse (one)
children (many)
men (many)
mice (many)
child (one)
What I learnt today:
Put a if you know this topic well.
1. Naming words can be singular or plural
2. Singular means one. Plural means more than one
3. The plural form of naming words can be made by adding ‘s’ or
‘es’ to the word
4. Some plural forms of naming words are spelt differently, for
example men, women, children, feet, teeth, people
5. While using naming words in a sentence, we need to be careful,
and use the singular or plural form correctly.
70
4.4 Pronouns
In this lesson you will learn :
1. The need to use pronouns
2. The use of appropriate pronouns
Write a sentence using these words
1. He
Thinking Box
2. She
3. They
4. We
Let’s learn the purpose and usage of pronouns
This passage is about a dog. Read the passage carefully and underline the naming words
The dog is 4 years old. The dog is brown. The dog has a black tail. The dog lives in our flat. The dog loves our family. The dog always plays with me. The dog loves to go for walk.
Read the passage out loud. The word ‘dog’ is repeated many times in the passage! How can we avoid this? We can use a pronoun. A pronoun is a word that is used instead of a naming word.
The dog is 4 years old. It is brown. It has a black tail. It lives in our flat. It loves our family. It always plays with me. It loves to go for walk. The pronoun ‘it’ is used instead of the naming word ‘dog’.
What is a pronoun? A pronoun is a word which is used in place of a naming word. Pronouns are used to avoid repetition of the same naming word.
Let’s learn the important pronouns
Types of naming words
Pronouns you can use to replace the naming word
Write your name here.
I
Me
My (belonging to me)
71
A person you are speaking to
You
Your (belonging to you)
He
Him
His (belonging to him)
A person who is a man (singular)
She
Her (belonging to her)
A person who is a woman (singular)
They
Them
Their (belonging to them)
Many people (plural)
You
We
Us
Our (belonging to us)
Many people, including yourself (plural)
It
Its (belonging to it)
An object or an animal or a place
72
Let’s look at some examples.
1. My name is write you name here. I am a student.
2. Ahmed is a doctor. He works at the hospital.
3. The cab will pick up Sonali. She is coming from the train station.
4. The students are going on a trip. They are going to the zoo.
Choose the pronoun to fill in the blank.
1. Akash and Johnny are writing on
the board. _____________ are writing on the board.
3. Ria and I drank some juice. _______ drank some juice.
a. They
b. It
a. We
b. He
2. The box is very heavy. ______ is very heavy.
a. It
b. I
Let’s learn to use pronouns accurately to improve your communication
Pronouns are used to help us communicate without repetition and without confusion. So it is important to use the correct pronoun when writing or speaking. To use the correct pronoun in a sentence, you must ask two important questions. The answers to the questions will help you use the correct pronoun.
Is the naming word singular or plural?
What naming word is the pronoun replacing?
The answers to the questions will help you use the correct pronoun.
Is the naming word singular or plural?
Singular
What naming word is the pronoun replacing?
My own name
One person that I am speaking to
A person who is a man
A person who is a woman
An object or animal
I
You
He
She
It
73
Let’s look at an example.
Deepika is excited.
1.
Is the naming word singular or plural? Deepika is one person.
2. What naming word is the pronoun replacing?
Deepika is a person who is a female.
Deepika is excited. -> She is excited.
Is the naming word singular or plural?
Plural
What naming word is the pronoun replacing?
Myself, along with other people
Many people that I am speaking to
Many other people
We
You
They
Let’s look at an example.
Pradeep and I are friends.
1.
Is the naming word singular or plural? Pradeep and I are two people. It is more than one person.
2. What naming word is the pronoun replacing?
‘Pradeep and I’ refers to myself, along with another person
Pradeep and I are friends. -> We are friends.
Let’s make this passage better by replacing the naming word with pronouns.
Activity Time!
Ayesha is my sister. Ayesha is 17 years old. Ayesha goes to college. Ayesha likes to play
football and basketball. Ayesha’s friends like Ayesha because Ayesha is smart and fun-loving.
Ayesha is my sister. __________ (She/It) is 17 years old. __________ (She/Ayesha) goes to college.
__________ (She/He) likes to play football and basketball. __________ (Her/Your) friends like
__________ (her/Ayesha) because __________ (she/they) is smart and fun-loving.
74
What I learnt today:
Put a if you know this topic well.
1. A pronoun is a word that is used in place of a naming word,
to avoid repetition of the same naming words.
2. To use the correct pronoun in a sentence, you must ask two
important questions - which naming word are we replacing? Is the naming word singular or plural?
3. Singular pronouns are - I, you, he, she, it
4. Plural pronouns are - we, you, they
4.5 Action Words
In this lesson you will learn :
1. Action words (verbs) and their connection to naming words
2. How to use action words correctly in sentences
What do you use for the following actions? Write the words in the appropriate column
See | Sing | Kick | Clap | Eat | Talk | Read | Listen | Type | Jump | Cook | Run | Look | Hear
Thinking Box
Hands
Feet
Mouth
Eyes
Ears
75
Let’s learn action words and their connection to naming words
Who/What is shown in the
Who/What is shown in the
Who/What is shown in the
picture? A boy
picture? A kite
picture? Doctor
What is he doing? Throwing a ball
What is it doing? Flying in the sky
What is she doing?
Thinking
Naming Words
Action Words
boy
throwing
kite
flying
doctor
thinking
As we can see, the action words tell us what a person or object is doing.
An Action Word or Verb is used to show an action connected with a person, an animal/bird or a thing.
What are Verbs?
Verbs express:
1. Physical actions
2. Mental actions
3. States of being
I am cold
To Jump
To Think
To Be
Circle the action word. The naming word is highlighted. Please underline the action word (verb)
1. The cat ran across the road.
2. Sejal and I travel by bus everyday.
3. Mohan is helping me with my homework.
4. The children will play in the evening.
76
Let’s learn to use action words correctly in sentences
Since the action word tells us more about a naming word, it appears near the naming word.
We need to keep in mind that the form of the action word or verb depends on the time of the action.
Past
Now
Future
Whether the action happened in the past
Whether it is happening currently
Whether it will happen in the future
The action has happened in the past (Eg. Rohit studied yesterday).
The action is happening in the present (Rohit is studying now).
The action will take place in the future (I will study tomorrow).

The action could be happening on a regular basis (Seema studies every day after college)

The action is a fact (The sun rises in the east)
As we can see, depending on past, present or future, the form of the action word will change, however, the meaning of the action word/ verb remains the same
Let’s look at some more examples:
Last year it rained a lot (‘Last year’ is in the past)
I will return your book next week (‘next week’ refers to the future)
We are playing hockey now (This action is happening currently ‘now’)
My mother works in a factory (This is a fact)
We celebrate Children’s Day on 14th November every year (An action that happens ‘every year’ on a regular basis).
Fill in the gaps using the correct action word from the box.
Activity Time!
jumped
is driving will watch have fly
1. Shilpa _____________________ the car now.
2. Birds __________in the sky.
3.
I _____________________ TV at night.
4. The cat ___________ over the wall
5. Every week, we __________ a test
77
What I learnt today:
Put a if you know this topic well.
1. Action words / verbs tell us about an action connected to a
person or thing.
2. The form of the action word or verb depends on the
time of the action (past, present or future).
4.6 Describing Objects, Surroundings and Processes
In this lesson you will learn :
1. How describing words adds more information to naming words.
2. Use describing words related to size, shape, texture and color in sentences
Do you know how to describe the things around you?
Thinking Box
Let’s learn about Describing Words
Words that are used to describe things are called adjectives. We use them to give details about something or someone.
A red bus. A tall girl. In these sentences, red and tall are adjectives, because they describe the bus and the girl.
Adjectives add details to make sentences clearer or more interesting. Look closely at how adjectives are used in these sentences!

A screwdriver is a useful tool

Arjun is wearing a yellow shirt

Radha lives in a lovely house
78
Read how Komal is describing her new sales office. Then, answer the questions!
The new sales office is in a tall green building. There is a small beautiful park next to it.
What adjectives did Komal use to describe the new office?
1.
2.
Let’s learn about a few words that are the same, but have different meanings
Adjectives can be used to describe COLOUR
Adjectives can be used to describe SIZE
Adjectives can be used to describe QUALITY
A blue uniform
A long bridge
A happy face
An orange balloon
A large pot
A sharp tool
What is the importance of adjectives in our everyday life?
1. Adjectives help to describe the size, shape, colour and even quality of things.
2. Using them correctly helps us to communicate better with people.
3.
It helps to understand what we read, speak and write about.
79
Write 3 sentences to describe your home. You can use any of these adjectives. Share your writing with your friends in class.
Activity Time!
1. Size - big, small, long, large
2.Colour – White, yellow, green, black
3. Quality - beautiful, quiet, clean, happy
1.
2.
3.
What I learnt today:
Put a if you know this topic well.
1. Words that are used to describe things are called
Adjectives
2. Describing words add details to make sentences clearer
or more interesting
3. Describing the size, shape, colour and quality of things
help us communicate better
80
4.7 Introduction to Punctuation
In this lesson you will learn :
1. The importance of punctuation marks
2. How to use punctuation marks correctly
Do you know the names of these symbols? Match the words given below to the correct symbol.
Thinking Box
question mark
full stop
comma
exclamation mark
Let’s learn the importance of punctuation marks
Let’s look at an interesting sentence.
“I love cooking my family and my pets.”
What does this sentence mean? Does it mean that this man loves to ‘cook’ his family and his pets?
No! What the person is actually trying to tell us is that he loves 3 things: cooking, his family, and his pets.
Now let’s use punctuation marks and correct the sentence.
“I love cooking, my family, and my pets.”
This is why punctuation is important. The punctuation in this sentence makes the meaning clear to understand.
81
Here’s another example to understand the importance of punctuation. Please read both the paragraphs aloud.
1. Oh wow congratulations when do you have to leave I’ll tell everyone and we will have a small party for you before you go. Hey, guess what Anil has got a job and he has to leave for the city next week we are planning a farewell party for him will you all come.
2. Oh wow! Congratulations! When do you
have to leave? I’ll tell everyone and we will have a small party for you before you go. Hey, guess what? Anil has got a job and he has to leave for the city next week. We are planning a farewell party for him. Will you all come?
Which paragraph was easier to understand?

The first paragraph was difficult to read and understand, wasn’t it? This is because there are no punctuation marks. The second paragraph has punctuation, so it is much easier to understand, and it sounds better.
When we speak to each other, our voice adds a lot to our words. We stop and pause at the end of
sentences. We also ask questions in a particular tone. We use another tone when we are surprised or excited, so it is easy to understand what we’re saying.
But when we write, we cannot use our voice. That’s why we use punctuation marks.
Punctuation marks are symbols that we use while writing, to make a sentence clear and interesting.
Circle the punctuation marks in these sentences.

Finally, Diwali has arrived! Anita, Mukesh and Shana are extremely excited. They can’t wait to
go to their favourite event of all time - the fireworks exhibition! They run down the stairs to
go to the ground early. Where are the children’s parents? They will join them later.

The three siblings climb a tree - a tall mango tree - to get the best view. Wow! Look at the
colours! There’s red, green, yellow and blue - every colour they could imagine!
Let’s learn the importance of punctuation marks
Full stop (.)
A full stop is a dot that is always placed at the end of a sentence.
Turn to any other page in this book and look at the sentences. All sentences will end with a full stop.
Capital letter at the beginning of the sentence
The first letter of a sentence is always written as a capital letter.
Again, turn to another page in this book. Observe the sentences. All sentences will start with a capital letter.
The word ‘I’ is also always in a capital letter, no matter which part of the sentence it comes in.
When can I go to school?
Comma (,)
This symbol is called a comma.
The comma is used in a sentence to show a break within the sentence. A comma is used in a few situations.
1.
It is used while making a list of more than 2 things.

The Indian flag is saffron, white and green.

The boy shouted, screamed and cried when he saw the clown.
2.
It is used in sentences which have two parts that talk about two different things.

After we eat, we will take a nap.

The clothes were beautiful, but they were too expensive.
82
Tip: When typing sentences on a computer using MS Word, it will automatically suggest corrections when you make a mistake with punctuation.
Look out for a red line under the sentence when you make a mistake.
Rewrite the following sentences with a full stop at the end and a capital letter at the beginning.
Activity Time!
1.
the dog barked
2.
i like to drive my car
3. my father will cook the rice
1.
2.
3.
What I learnt today:
Put a if you know this topic well.
1. Punctuation is important so sentences are clear and
easy to understand.
2. A full stop is always used at the end of a sentence.
3. The first letter of a sentence is always written in a
capital letter.
4. A comma is used to show a break within a sentence.
83
4.8 Kinds of Sentences - Introduction
In this lesson you will learn :
1. Different types of sentences
2. How to make sentences for different situations
Read these sentences out loud.
1.
“Is this a mango tree?”
Thinking Box
2. This is a big mango tree.
3.
“Wow! This painting is so big!”
What are the differences you notice in sentence 1, 2 & 3?
Let’s learn about the different types of sentences
I love my cat.
Sentences are a group of words that convey a single idea. There are 4 different types of sentences based on what the sentence means.
My new car is Red.
My dress is blue.
Declarative Sentence
A declarative sentence tells us some information, a fact or an explanation. This is the most common type of sentence that we use. (All the sentences in this section are declarative sentences.) They always end with a full stop.
I love my cat.
My new car is Red.
My dress is blue.
Exclamatory Sentence
An exclamatory sentence is a sentence which expresses a strong emotion - like anger, surprise, excitement or happiness. An exclamatory sentence always ends with an exclamation mark (!)
I’m so angry with her!
I’m so angry with her!
Oh no!
You did a great job!
84
Congratulations!
Give me the keys.
Imperative Sentence
An imperative sentence is a sentence which expresses a command or an instruction to someone. (Instruction manuals, recipe books, etc. are written like this)
Give me the keys.
Drive slowly, and take the next right.
Please bring me the jar from the kitchen.
Interrogative Sentence
An interrogative sentence is a sentence which asks a question. Did you know that an interrogative sentence always ends with a particular punctuation symbol? Do you know what it is? It is a question mark.
Where did you keep the water bottle?
Is it raining outside?
Where did you keep the water bottle?
Does this shop sell clothes?
Read these sentences carefully. Rewrite them in the correct box according to the type of sentence.
1. Come to my office later.
2.
I have a gray dress.
3. How do I open this box?
4. The car broke down yesterday!
Declarative Sentence
Exclamatory Sentence
Imperative Sentence
Interrogative Sentence
Let’s learn about how to make sentences for different situations
The different types of sentences are meant to be used in specific situations. They help you communicate efficiently depending on the situation.
For example, you’ve visited a beautiful park in your neighborhood. You’re writing a text to your friend telling them about your day.
To share your emotion in the best way to your friend, would you use a declarative sentence or an exclamatory sentence?
The flowers in the park were beautiful.
Wow! The flowers in the park were beautiful!
85
The exclamatory sentence is the best way to express your joy to your friend.
Let’s look at another example.
You are sitting in a classroom and studying. Another student comes in to take some books and leaves. He forgets to close the door. What is the correct sentence to use to ask him to close the door?
Close the door.
Please close the door.
Using the imperative sentence ‘Close the door’ is giving the person a direction or a command. However, it is not polite to use a commanding sentence while asking someone to do something for us. It is more polite to ask them the question.
Megha and Mohan are walking on the road. They are having a conversation about their day at school. Write a short conversation between the two of them.
Activity Time!
Make sure to include at least one sentence of each of the 4 kinds of
sentences in the conversation.
Megha: What an exciting day at school today!
Mohan: Yes, it was. Did you see _____________________?
Megha:
Mohan:
What I learnt today:
Put a if you know this topic well.
1. There are 4 types of sentences - declarative,
interrogative, exclamatory and imperative.
2. A declarative sentence gives information or states a fact.
3. An exclamatory sentence is used to express a strong
emotion - like anger, surprise, excitement or happiness.
4. An imperative sentence expresses a command or a
request.
5. An interrogative sentence asks a question.
86
4.9 Writing Simple Sentences
In this lesson you will learn :
1. The importance of word order in making sentences
2. To rearrange words correctly to create meaningful sentences
Look around the room that you are sitting in. Observe for a few minutes. Write 5 sentences about what you see and what people are doing.
Thinking Box
Let’s learn the importance of word order in making sentences
The little boy is hiding under the table.
What is this sentence about? It is about the little boy. ‘The little boy’ is the subject of the sentence.
Brazil is popular for the game of football.
What is this sentence about? It is about Brazil. ‘Brazil’ is the subject of the sentence.
Justice is quick and fair.
What is this sentence about? It is about justice. ‘Justice’ is the subject of the sentence.
Every complete sentence has 3 parts:
1. The Subject is what or whom a sentence is about. 2. The Verb (action word). 3. The Object tells us something about the subject.
Subject
Predicate
Object
The little boy
is hiding
under the table.
Brazil
is
popular for the game of football.
Justice
is
quick and fair
87
In an English sentence, the subject always comes first in a sentence. This is followed by the verb (action word) and then the object.
It’s important to use the correct word order while forming a sentence. When the correct word order is not used, it is confusing to understand the meaning of the sentence.
Listen to the teacher the students.
X
This sentence is wrong because the word order is wrong. The subject ‘the students’ should come at the beginning of the sentence. Let’s write the sentence in the correct order.
The students listen to the teacher.
Combine the two parts and write a full sentence. Remember to always write the subject first.
1.
Verb and Object
Subject
fell down and broke.
The red jar
2.
Subject
Verb and Object
Nicky’s brother
is going to watch a movie.
Let’s learn to rearrange words correctly to create meaningful sentences
We learnt that the subject always comes first in a sentence. The action word or the verb of the predicate comes next. This is followed by the rest of the predicate (also called the object of the sentence).
You can remember this pattern using these colors.
Subject
Verb (action word)
Object
The cat
runs
across the road.
The students
listen
to the teacher.
You must always use the words in this order to write a correct, meaningful sentence.
88
Rearrange these words to write a correct sentence. Use the colour pattern to help you.
Activity Time!
Subject
Verb (action word)
Object
1. symbolizes / peace. / The colour white
2.
the largest continent in the world. / Asia / is
3. walked / Neil Armstrong / on the moon.
4.
in Australia. / Kangaroos / live
What I learnt today:
Put a if you know this topic well.
1. The words in a sentence must be written in the correct
order.
2. The subject of a sentence is what the sentence is about.
3. The subject always comes first in a sentence. This is
followed by the verb (action word) and then the object.
89
4.10 Reading Activity
In this lesson you will learn :
1. Strategies to become a better reader
2. Read and get information from posters and signs
What was the last thing that you enjoyed reading? What was it about?
Thinking Box
Let’s learn strategies to become a better reader
Reading is an activity that we do throughout the day. We read road signs. We read words and instructions while using our mobile phone. We read the news, text messages and emails.
We read mainly for three reasons.
1. Reading for information.
Reading is the most effective way to get information and grow in knowledge. When we read books and articles, we learn new things that improve our skills. We read on the internet to find information about anything in the world.
10 ways to become a better reader
2. Reading for instructions.
When we fill out a form, how do we know what details we need to write? We read the words on the form! Reading carefully can help us complete many tasks correctly. Instruction manuals, user guides, road signs, etc. are all meant for us to read and follow instructions.
1. Read
2. Read
6. Read
7. Read
3. Reading for entertainment.
3. Read
8. Read
Reading is one of the most productive and healthy activities we can do in our free time. We can discover many interesting characters and funny stories through reading.
4. Read
5. Read
9. Read
10. Read
90
Reading is a very important skill to practice and perfect. Reading can seem difficult and boring, if you are not used to it.
Here are a few things you can do to become a better reader.
1. Read everything you can see. Read the newspaper, posters, magazines, online
articles, etc.
2. Dedicate 20 minutes every day to read something that you enjoy. Choose something that fits your
interests. Find books, short stories or newsletters on a topic that you like.
3. Read with a pencil in your hand. Underline important words or points as you read. You can also
underline words that you do not know the meaning of. Use the Internet to find the meaning of these words.
Let’s decide to read more! Fill in the blanks to set your goals.
1.
I will read _______ books this year. (Write a number)
2.
I will read from ______ to ______ every day. (Choose a time)
Let’s learn to read and gain information from posters and signs
Understanding posters
A common way to share information is through posters. Posters present information by using images and colours.
While reading a poster, first take a look at the title. This will tell you what the poster is about. Then, read the highlighted points. This will give you a summary of the information given in the poster. Finally, read all the details under the highlighted points.
This will help you understand all the information.
Understanding signs and symbols
Another way to give information through images is through symbols. There are some common symbols that we see around us.
For example, arrows are one of the most used symbols. When arrows are used in road signs, they are telling us which direction we should go in.
Hair
Eye
When arrows are used in posters or presentations, they are telling us to focus on a particular thing.
Ear
Mouth
91
Here are some more commonly used signs and symbols.

Red colour: When the colour red is used in any symbols, it usually means that something must not be done.

Yellow colour: When the colour yellow is used, it means, it means that you must be careful. You must pay special attention because there is some risk.

This is the Recycle symbol. If you see it on any objects, it means that the object can be recycled. If the symbol is on a dustbin, it means you must use that bin for recyclable items.

This is the special access symbol. It is used to indicate when something is designed specifically for use by people with disabilities. Some public spaces have a ramp access, reserved parking facility or a special bathroom for people with disabilities. You will see this symbol in such places.

This symbol is used to indicate the place where you can exit a building or a room.
Digital symbols
When using an app or a website, you will see this symbol on
the screen. Clicking this will open the menu which shows you all the available options.

This is the power on/off button. You will find this on remotes and devices like the TV, mobile phone etc. You can even find it on the computer screen. Clicking this will turn on or turn off the device.
Match the following:
Activity Time!
1. Power on and off
2. Be careful
3. Menu
4. Recycle
92
What I learnt today:
Put a if you know this topic well.
1. We read to gain information, to get instructions and for
entertainment.
2. Posters are a way to convey information in a visually
appealing manner.
3. There are commonly used symbols that have particular
meanings
4.11 Speaking
In this lesson you will learn :
1. The appropriate expressions to use while speaking.
2. How to clearly communicate your views to others.
If you could speak to any famous person in the world, who would you speak to? What would you ask them?
Thinking Box
93
Let’s learn the appropriate expressions to use while speaking
It is important to use words in a clear and correct way while communicating. But, good communication is more than just the right words. When we speak, people can hear the emotions in our voice and see our facial expressions.
The expressions of your voice
Can you remember a speech that you enjoyed listening to? Or a dialogue in a film by your favorite actor? What emotion was the person feeling during the speech? Were they angry or sad or happy?
The easiest way to convey emotion while speaking is through your voice. Avoid speaking in a single tone that does not share your emotions. Use a happy, excited voice to talk about things that excite you. Use a calm, lower voice to talk about topics that are serious or sad.
It’s also important to be aware of the volume of your voice. When speaking to many people or in a crowded room, try to speak loudly and slowly so that everyone can hear you. Speak in a quieter voice when speaking to one or few people.
The expressions of your face
Why have video calls become so popular when we already have voice calls to speak to each other? It is because seeing each other’s faces is an important part of communication for us. When you speak, people are usually using both their eyes and ears to focus on you. They can hear your voice and see your face.
I am writing my exams tomorrow
Our faces naturally make expressions to show emotion. So while speaking, use your facial expressions to match what you are saying. Eye contact is the most important part of your facial expressions. It helps the people speaking feel connected. When speaking to a group of people, move your eye contact from one person to another. Speaking without eye contact shows that you are not confident about what you are saying.
I am writing my exams tomorrow
Suitable facial expressions + Proper voice tone = Effective Communication
Pick a simple, popular story that you know from your childhood. Practice telling the entire story in front of a mirror.
Use voice expressions properly. When speaking in front of the mirror, do it by maintaining eye contact with yourself. It might feel strange at first. But it is great practice for speaking to other people.
Let’s learn how to clearly communicate your views to others
“Apples contain Vitamin C.”
This sentence is a fact. You can check if it is true or false. It does not change from one person to the other or from one place to another.
“Apples are better than bananas.”
This sentence is not a fact. Suresh likes apples better than bananas. His sister Sangeetha likes bananas better than apples. This is an opinion.
94
During conversations, we sometimes state facts. Other times we share our personal opinion on something. The person that we are speaking to might have a different opinion on the same topic. We can use certain words and phrases to communicate our opinions during conversations.
Tip: It is normal and acceptable for you to have a different opinion from others. We always need to communicate respectfully, even if we do not agree with others.
Opinion phrases
Examples
I feel that
I feel that these yellow lights are too bright.
In my opinion,
In my opinion, Mrs. Sharma is the best teacher in the school.
Personally, I think
Personally, I think this house is too small.
I respectfully disagree
I respectfully disagree with what you are saying. Eating meat is normal for some and not normal for others. It is upto people to decide.
Write 4-5 sentences about the place where you live. Use the opinion phrases that we just learnt.
Activity Time!
What I learnt today:
Put a if you know this topic well.
1. Facial expressions and voice expressions help us to
communicate our thoughts clearly.
2. Maintaining eye contact with the people we are
speaking to helps us to communicate confidently.
3.
In a conversation, we can share our opinions with people by using phrases like “I feel that…” and “Personally, I think…”
95
4.12 Listening
In this lesson you will learn :
1. The purpose and importance of listening
2. How to practise listening to follow instructions correctly
We listen to many things in our daily lives! Tick the things that you listen to regularly.
Thinking Box
Music
YouTube videos
Voice notes
Teacher teaching in class
News
Speeches
Audiobooks
Let’s learn the purpose and importance of listening
Effective communication is being able to both speak well and listen well. When you are having a conversation with someone, it’s important to listen carefully. This helps us understand the other person and contribute to the conversation.
Listening is an important skill to develop. We listen for many purposes.
Listening for information

Sometimes we listen to get information. When we listen to the news or listen to announcements in a train station- it is listening to get specific information.
Listening for instructions
We must also learn to listen for instructions. In the classroom and in the workplace, many institutions are shared. If we don’t listen carefully, it is hard to follow the instructions correctly. Listening for instructions and information are two of the most common purposes of listening.
96
Listening for relationships and entertainment

Sometimes, our listening skills can also be useful in other ways. Listening to a friend helps us understand them and build a relationship. You can also listen to music, audiobooks and podcasts for entertainment and pleasure.
Think and recall everything that you did in the last 5 days. Write down 3 instances when you had to listen carefully for information or instruction.
1.
2.
3.
Let’s learn how to practise listening to follow instructions correctly
Listening is like any other skill - you must practice to become good at it. Here are 3 simple things you can do to practise and improve your listening skills.
1. Spend 15 minutes every day listening to something like the news or a speech. Avoid distractions. Don’t
do anything else while listening.
2. When you listen to someone speaking or listen to a recording, summarise what you have heard. Try to
use 2 or 3 sentences to recollect what the person has said.
3. While your teacher speaks and as you listen, try to write the words that you are hearing. This might
seem difficult at first. But keep trying.
Choose the correct answer to the question.
Activity Time!
1. What is effective communication?
a. To both listen well and speak well b. To only know how to speak to someone
2. Why is it important to listen carefully?
a. To forget all the information given by someone b. To understand the information and instructions given by the speaker
3. What does it mean to summarize what you’ve listened to?
a. To recollect everything you’ve heard in 2 or 3 sentences b. To type everything in a document
What I learnt today:
Put a if you know this topic well.
1. Listening is an important communication skill to get information and receive instructions from people.
2. When listening, it is important to focus on the person who is speaking, write down the information and recollect what you have heard.
97
4.13 Talking about Likes and Dislikes
In this lesson you will learn :
1. The difference between likes and dislikes
2. How to share our likes and dislikes
3. How to talk about others’ likes and dislikes
What are two things that you like to eat? What are two things that you do not like to eat? Write them below.
Thinking Box
Let’s learn the difference between likes and dislikes
This is Naresh. He likes to eat cake. He enjoys playing football. He loves his puppy.
He does not like the taste of pizza. He does not like being around cats. He dislikes eating apples.
These are Naresh’s likes and dislikes!
Likes are things or activities or places that we enjoy. They are things that we feel a positive emotion of joy or excitement towards. Dislikes are things that we do not like. They are things towards which we feel a negative emotion of hatred or fear or boredom.
Different people can have different likes and dislikes. You and your friend might like many of the same things. However, you might also dislike some of the things that they like. Our likes and dislikes are one of the things that makes us unique.
98
This is Samvita. Take a look at her likes and dislikes. Write them down.
Samvita’s Likes
Samvita’s Dislikes
Let’s learn how to share our likes and dislikes
We can use particular phrases to talk about our likes and dislikes. Let’s learn which are the best phrases to use.
Talking about likes
I like...
I like eating ice cream.
I love…
I love my friends.
Use this phrase to express a strong liking towards something.
I adore…
I adore the paintings made by my sister.
Use this phrase to express a strong admiration of something or someone.
I enjoy…
I enjoy swimming in the ocean.
Use this phrase to talk about an activity that you like to do.
I’m crazy about…
I’m crazy about football.
Use this phrase to express a strong liking towards something.
99
I’m fond of…
I’m fond of my English teacher.
Use this phrase to talk about a person that you like a lot.
Talking about dislikes
I don’t like…
I don’t like driving.
I hate…
I hate watching the news.
Use this phrase to express a strong dislike towards something.
I detest…
I detest cooking in a dirty kitchen.
The word ‘detest’ is a very strong negative word. Use this phrase to express a strong hatred towards something.
I can’t bear…
I can’t bear to clean my cupboard.
Use this phrase to talk about an activity or a thing that you don’t like to spend time on.
While we may like and dislike many things, there are some things that we don’t have a positive or negative feeling about. To talk about things that you neither like nor dislike, use this phrase.

I don’t mind…

I don’t mind studying physics.
Write sentences about your own likes and dislikes. Use the phrases given below.
I’m fond of
I hate
I don’t mind
Let’s learn to talk about others’ likes and dislikes
You can also use these phrases to talk about others’ likes and dislikes.

She is fond of her little sister.

Sonya is crazy about cricket.

The teacher can’t bear untidiness in the classroom.

Pandi doesn’t mind eating apples or oranges.
While talking about likes and dislikes, we can also use these two phrases to add to the meaning of the sentence. Using these phrases adds an emphasis to how much you like or dislike something.
100
1. a lot
2. very much
It’s important to place them in the correct part of the sentence.
1. She likes her car a lot.
2. The little girl loves her puppy very much.
To talk about others’ likes and dislikes, we must first ask them. We must ask them what they like and dislike so that we know more about the person. Here are some questions you can ask to find out what someone likes or dislikes.
Questions to ask someone about their likes and dislikes
What kind of movies do you like? What kind of food do you like to eat?
Do you enjoy being a teacher? Do you enjoy dancing?
What is your favourite subject? Who is your favourite sportsperson?
What do you like about your city? What do you dislike about this house?
Naveen is at home. His sister Sherin comes in. Notice how they express their likes and dislikes.
Naveen: Hi Sherin! Would you like to watch a movie tonight? I enjoy going to the theater.
Sherin: Oh, no! I don’t feel like watching a movie tonight. Why don’t we go out to eat at a restaurant?
Naveen: Sure. I adore the new Chinese restaurant. Or shall we go to eat biryani?
Sherin: I don’t mind Chinese food.
Naveen: Yes, I don’t want to eat biryani today either. Great! Let’s go.
Let’s look at some more things that Sherin and Naveen like and dislike. Look at the chart carefully. Write 5 or 6 sentences about what the siblings like and dislike.
Activity Time!
Playing video games
Their neighbour
Cricket
Drinking soda
Naveen
X
: )
X
: )
Sherin
: )
: )
X
X
101
What I learnt today:
Put a if you know this topic well.
1. All of us have different likes and dislikes - things that we
enjoy and things that we don’t.
2. We can use different phrases to communicate our likes
and dislikes in different ways.
3. We can ask other people questions to understand what
their likes and dislikes are.
4.14 Greetings and self-introduction
In this lesson you will learn :
1. The appropriate expressions to greet people in formal and informal situations.
2. How to introduce yourself to others effectively
A new teacher comes to your classroom. They ask everyone to introduce themselves. What would you say? Write it down.
Thinking Box
Let’s learn the appropriate expressions to greet people in formal and informal situations.
When we begin speaking with someone or addressing many people, we first greet them. There are many different kinds of greetings. They must be ued appropriately in the right context.
You use a formal greeting when you’re speaking to a person of authority. Formal greetings are also for conversations in formal contexts like workplace, conferences, business meetings, etc. You can also use a formal greeting when you don’t know the person.
Here are a few greetings you can use when you are starting a formal conversation.
102
Formal Greetings
Hello! Good morning.
Hello! How are you?
Hello!
Good morning.
Good afternoon.
Good evening.
Hello! How are you?
It’s nice to meet you.
Informal greetings are greetings we use while speaking to friends and family. It is for people with whom we have casual conversations, outside a professional setting.
Informal Greetings
Hi!
Hey!
What’s up?
What’s going on?
Long time, no see!
Take a look at these situations. Which greeting is appropriate for Sheila to use?
1. Sheila meets her best friend from school at a wedding. They are in touch on WhatsApp and Instagram.
They have not met each other in a while. What should Sheila say? a. Good evening. b. Long time, no see!
2. Sheila wants to join an internship. Her teacher introduces her to an office manager who has more
details about the internship. Sheila walks into a meeting room to meet the office manager. What should Sheila say? a. How are you? It’s nice to meet you b. Hey! What’s up?
Let’s learn how to introduce yourself to others effectively
In the last activity, Sheila met two people. When she meets her friend, her friend already knows her. Sheila does not need to introduce herself. They can begin a conversation because they know each other well. However, when Sheila meets the office manager to talk about the internship, the first thing she has to do is to introduce herself.
We introduce ourselves to people in different situations to give them some basic information about who we are and what we do. The way we introduce ourselves depends on the situation in which we are asked to introduce ourselves.
103
While introducing yourself in a classroom,
it’s relevant to share information about what you’re studying.
While introducing yourself in a job interview, it’s relevant to share information about your job skills and experience.
While introducing yourself to a new friend, it’s good to talk about your likes and dislikes.
When we are asked to introduce ourselves, we can sometimes feel nervous because we don’t know what to say. A good practice is to prepare 5 or 6 sentences of an introduction. You can use this prepared introduction with some small changes. That way you will not feel nervous to introduce yourself!
Let’s look at Shamini’s introduction and learn how to form our own introduction.
Hello everyone! My name is Shamini, and I am a student at Ashoka University. I am studying to be a librarian. I chose my course because I enjoy reading. I also would like to help small kids read more.
I’m also a basketball player. I go to the park thrice a week to teach some kids to play basketball. The happiest part of my day is when I spend time with children. I’m a patient teacher and a good listener.
Shamini’s introduction can be split up into 6 parts. Using these 6 simple parts, you too can write your own introduction!
1
Your name
Hello everyone! My name is Shamini,
2
What you do primarily - as a student or for work
and I am a student at Ashoka University. I am studying to be a librarian.
3
Some personal or interesting information to add to the previous point
I chose my course because I enjoy reading. I also would like to help small kids read more.
4
Another activity that you do or interest that you have
I’m also a basketball player. I go to the park thrice a week to teach some kids to play basketball.
5
Something that you like doing
The happiest part of my day is when I spend time with children.
6
A personal strength or a positive attribute that you have
I’m a patient teacher and a good listener.
104
It’s time to write your own introduction! Follow the 6 steps. Write 1 or 2 sentences to fit into each step of an introduction.
Activity Time!
1
Your name
2
What you do primarily - as a student or for work
3
Some personal or interesting information to add to the previous point
4
Another activity that you do or interest that you have
5
Something that you like doing
6
A personal strength or a positive attribute that you have
You’ve written your own introduction! Now practice it out loud. Stand in front of a mirror and practice your introduction.
What I learnt today:
Put a if you know this topic well.
1. We use greetings to begin a conversation. In formal
situations, we must use formal greetings. While speaking to friends and family, we can use informal greetings.
2. We introduce ourselves when we meet someone new to give
them more information about us.
3.
Introductions include basic information about myself and also tell the person more about who I am as a person
105
4.15 Asking and responding
to questions
In this lesson you will learn :
1. The differences between questions and responses.
2. How to ask and respond to questions using the correct phrases and expressions.
Imagine that you are meeting the CEO of your dream company! What are 2 questions you would ask them?
Thinking Box
Now they ask you these two questions. How would you respond? Write them below.
1. “What is a new skill you would like to learn?”
2. “If you could begin a company or a business, what would it be?”
Let’s learn the differences between questions and responses
A question is when you ask someone something. A question is a type of sentence that we ask or write to get further information. In written language, a question always ends with a question mark (?). In spoken language, we change the tone of our voice while asking a question.
Read these sentences out loud.

I am going to the bank tomorrow.

Are you going to the bank tomorrow?
While asking the question, the tone of your voice must become higher at the end of the sentence.
Often, but not always, question sentences begin with a few words that are used to ask questions, also called ‘Question Words’.
For example:
How are you? Who is your class teacher? What is the time now?
106
Not all questions begin with these words though; there are many other alternatives that can be used to frame the structure of a sentence. For example:
Have you ever tried ice cream with dessert before? Do you have a pen?
Are you going to see the doctor tomorrow?
Questions usually require a response or an answer from the other person. A response or an answer is what another person says to address the question that is asked to them. Response sentences usually won’t make sense on their own. You must know the question to fully understand the meaning of the response.
For example, see these responses. Do they make sense to you?
5 pm.
She will.
Not today.
But when we read it with a question, you will fully understand it.
Question
Response
What time is Reena coming?
5 pm.
Will Reena get my umbrella?
She will.
Are you taking Reena to watch the movie?
Not today.
Match the question to the response
Question
Response
Can we use this room?
Yes.
What time is the meeting?
Of course, you can!
Which fruit do you prefer?
I like grapes.
Are you going to class today?
It’s at 4pm.
Let’s learn how to ask and respond to questions using the correct phrases and expressions
There are many types of questions. Each type of question calls for a different type of response. Here we will look at two types of questions:
Wh- Questions
Wh- questions are questions that start with who, what, when, where ,why and how. The question gives a clear indication of the information that the person wants to know.
107
Yes or No Questions
These are questions for which the answer is usually either a yes or a no. When used in a formal setting, it is good to answer these questions in a full sentence. Avoid just saying “Yes.” or “No.” as a response.
When answering a yes or no question, you can also add some additional information that is useful.
Sometimes the answer to the question might not be a yes or a no. In that case, you can respond using some of the following phrases.
I’m not sure.
I don’t mind.
When is the meeting happening?
It is at 2pm on Friday
Do you know how to use MS Excel?
Yes, I know how to use MS Excel.
Where do I have to come?
You can come to our office for the meeting.
Did Rhea come to school today?
I’m not sure. I did not check.
Are they going to build a new bridge here?
No, they are not. They cancelled the bridge project this year
Mallika calls a restaurant to ask them about their timings, what food they have on the menu and if they have home delivery. The restaurant manager also asks for Mallika’s contact details and her food order.
Activity Time!
Write the conversation between the two of them. Make sure that each
person asks at least one Wh- question and one yes-or-no question.
108
What I learnt today:
Put a if you know this topic well.
1. A question is when you ask someone something.
2. A response or an answer is what another person says to
address the question that is asked to them.
3. There are two types of questions - Wh- questions and
yes-or-no questions. The response depends on the type of question that is asked.
4.16 Group discussion on    simple topics
In this lesson you will learn :
1. How to express your thoughts clearly in a group discussion
2. Useful expressions to use while participating in a discussion
What is the meaning of a group discussion? Describe it in your own words.
Thinking Box
Let’s learn how to express your thoughts clearly in a group discussion
A conversation is when two or three people are speaking to each other. However, in some situations, topics are discussed among a bigger group of people. Many people give their thoughts and views on a topic. This is called a group discussion.
A group discussion is beneficial as it helps you:

Learn more about a topic

Solve big problems
109
Discuss new ideas
Understand different people’s views

Find strengths and weaknesses of an idea
Develop self-confidence
Group discussions can make you nervous. You may feel like you can’t explain what’s on your mind clearly. You may not get an opportunity to share your thoughts unless you speak up clearly.
Here are a few tips to keep in mind that will help you express yourself well in a group discussion.
Understand the purpose of the group discussion Think carefully about the purpose of the discussion. Find what and how you should participate. Stick to the point discussed.
Group Discussion Benefits

Learn more about a topic

Solve big problems
Be prepared Write down some notes on what you would like to share. Do some research on the topic using the Internet. Write your own personal thoughts and opinions.
Discuss new ideas
Understand different
people’s views

Find strengths and weaknesses of an idea
Speak confidently Use a clear and firm voice during group discussions. Share thoughts and opinions that are important for the discussion. Avoid using fillers like “um” and “I feel…” while expressing facts and information that you know to be true.
Develop self-
confidence
Keep eye contact while speaking Making eye contact is important. This helps you to grab the attention of every member in the room.
Listen attentively to others Listening to what others in the group are sharing can help you understand and gather new information about the topic. Avoid being distracted or doing other tasks when someone else is talking.
Do not interrupt others Avoid interrupting someone while they are speaking. Raise your hand if you want to contribute and wait till you have a chance to speak.
110
Your institute is having a discussion: Should a computer lab be set up that is open for 24 hours for students to use for studying?
You are invited to be part of the discussion. Write 3 or 4 things that you can contribute to the discussion. (They can be facts/information or they can be your personal opinions.)
1.
2.
3.
4.
Let’s learn useful expressions to use while participating in a discussion
During a group discussion, you respond and contribute in different ways. You can use these expressions to form appropriate sentences.
Expressing your opinion
Your opinion is your unique point of view on a topic or an issue. Opinions can change from one person to another.
Phrases to use
Example
In my opinion…
In my opinion, there are too many students in the classroom.
It seems to me that…
It seems to me that students need more space to work on their art projects.
Sharing facts and information
In group discussions, it’s good to also talk about facts and information that you have. Make sure that the information is accurate. It’s also a good idea to tell the group how you got the information.
Phrases to use
Example
We must keep in mind that…
We must keep in mind that there are 70 students and only 2 classrooms.
The fact is that…
The fact is that the average classroom size across the world is 24 students in each class.
Agreeing with someone
In a group discussion, you don’t always have to contribute a new thought. You can agree with what someone else has said and add to their views.
Phrases to use
Example
I agree with…
I agree with Latha.
You are absolutely right.
You are absolutely right. It is difficult to manage the schedule.
111
Disagreeing with someone
Sometimes, you might disagree with someone’s views. You would want to talk about an alternative perspective and help them reconsider their views. It’s important to do this in a polite and respectful way.
Phrases to use
Example
I don’t quite agree…
I don’t quite agree with what you’re saying.
I’m not convinced that…
I’m not convinced that the files need to be printed. Sending emails is more convenient.
Let’s recap the group discussion from earlier in the lesson.
Activity Time!
Your education institution is having a discussion to consider if they
should set up a computer lab that is open for 24 hours for students
to use for working and studying. You are invited to be part of the
discussion.
Write sentences to use during the group discussion using these
expressions.

In my opinion…
We must keep in mind that…

I’m not convinced that…
What I learnt today:
Put a if you know this topic well.
1. Group discussions are a great way for people to talk together, exchange ideas and solve a problem.
2. During a group discussion, it is important to be well-
prepared, confident and attentive when others are speaking.
3. We can use different expressions to express our
opinions, to agree with others and disagree with them.
112
4.17 Telephone Skills
In this lesson you will learn :
1. Three phases of a telephone call
2. How to use correct phrases to make telephone calls in a professional manner
Name the top 3 differences between making a formal call (call for official or professional purpose) and an informal call (call for personal reasons, to friends & family).
Thinking Box
1.
2.
3.
Let’s learn about three phases of a telephone call
Telephone calls are an important method of verbal/spoken communication. In other words, communication that is taking place between two people with the help of a Telephone/phone. Telephone calls can happen in personal and professional contexts. In a personal context, we can speak freely and communicate in a casual manner. Professional phone calls need to be formal, clear and effective. When speaking to a junior or senior, we have to maintain a few simple norms in the workplace.
Let’s learn more!

Caller: A person who makes the call

Receiver: A person who receives the call
On hold: When a call is kept waiting with a purpose

Engaged: The person you are trying to call is speaking to someone else
There are 3 phases to a telephone call:
Beginning
Middle
End
Observe the table on the next page.
113
Steps of a Telephone Call
Greet the person
Good morning Sir/ Madam
Beginning
I am Rahim from ITI, Guindy.
Introduce yourself
I am trainee in the electrician
trade.
Say why you are calling
I am calling to find out if I may come for an internship in your company.
Middle
Discuss what should be done
If there is a chance, please let me know. My contact number is 9999922222.
Thank the person.
Thank you Sir/Madam. Have a nice day.
End
Say goodbye.
Goodbye, Sir/Madam.
Speak politely. Use short sentences. Take notes about important information.
You need to call your friend to share about a job opening near your ITI. Tell your friend about the job title, office location, salary, interview date and other important details.
Complete this table with what you will say in each step of the phone call.
Greet the person
Beginning
Introduce yourself
Say why you are calling
Middle
Discuss what should be done
Thank the person.
End
Say goodbye.
114
Let’s learn about how to use correct phrases to make telephone calls in a professional manner
Different phone calls have different purposes. During formal phone calls for professional purposes, there are some phrases you can use in the conversation. Let’s learn some of them.
1. Making a call
When you call a friend, they might have your number saved on their phone or they might recognize your voice. So you might not introduce yourself. When making a formal call, it’s important to introduce yourself clearly. You can also include information about yourself that might help the person connect with who you are.
Hi, it’s [your name] from [company name].
Example of a professional telephone conversation
2. Asking for somebody
It’s important to check if you’re speaking to the right person.
Am I speaking to [person’s name]?

I’d like to speak to [person’s name], please.
“Hello, my name is Soham, I am calling from MM company. Can I speak to Jisha?”
“Hello, yes, this is Jisha speaking”
3. Giving the reasons for calling
Use these phrases to explain to the person why you are calling them.

I’m calling to discuss…

I just wanted to ask…

Could you tell me…?
See the example on the right.
4. Asking when somebody will be available
Sometimes when you call someone, they might not be available to talk at that moment. So it’s good to check with them. You can also ask when you can call them again.

Is it a good time for us to talk now?
“Hello Jisha, I’m calling to discuss about the New Year discount in our company”
“I am interested. Please tell me more”
When is a good time to call?
5. Asking the person to repeat information
Sometimes, we might not hear the person clearly. You can ask them to repeat what they said. Make sure to do this politely, by asking it as a request. You can also repeat the information and check if you’ve understood them correctly.

Could you please repeat that? I couldn’t hear you very well.

Could you spell that for me, please?

Let me see if I got that right. [repeat the information]
The most important thing to remember in professional conversations is to speak politely and respectfully.
115
You need to call a HR manager to ask for details about an internship. You want to know information about how you can apply, what are the responsibilities and the dates of the internship.
Activity Time!
Complete this table with what you will say in each step of the phone call.
Use at least 3 of the professional phrases we’ve learnt.
Greet the person
Beginning
Introduce yourself
Say why you are calling
Middle
Discuss what should be done
Thank the person.
End
Say goodbye.
What I learnt today:
Put a if you know this topic well.
1. There are 3 phases in a phone call. In the beginning, you greet
the person and introduce yourself. In the middle, discuss the purpose of your call. In the end, you thank the person.
2.
Informal telephone calls that we make to friends and family are different from formal telephone calls that we make for professional reasons.
3.
It’s important to be polite during formal telephone calls and use certain phrases.
116
4.18 Reading and understanding job descriptions
In this lesson you will learn :
1. What are job descriptions
2. How to relate your skills/education to a job description
You want to start a business where you prepare pickles and sell them. You want to hire one person to help you with the business. You want to find the best person for the job. Write down 2 skills that the person must have.
Thinking Box
1.
2.
Let’s learn about job descriptions
A job description is a simple document which has all the details about a job. When a company wants to hire a person for a particular job, they create a job description. The purpose of a job description is to clearly explain the responsibilities and required skills for that particular job. A job description ensures that the right people apply for the job.
Not all jobs are a good fit for our personal skills and interests. A job description can help us understand if the job suits our preferences.
Here is an example.
Job Title- Office Assistant Location- Chennai
Our small but growing company is looking for an honest, organized Office Assistant to manage the day-to-day administration of the office.
The successful applicant must have a positive attitude, a desire to work efficiently, and excellent communication skills.
Responsibilities and duties

Answer calls as required
Maintain filing and storage systems in the office

Schedule travel arrangements for senior executives
Greet clients and vendors upon arrival and direct them to
appropriate offices
117

Assist HR with sorting and collating documents
Handle all incoming mail
Qualifications and skills


Bachelor’s degree preferred
2+ years experience in an administrative capacity compulsory

Typing speed: minimum 60 WPM with 90 percent accuracy

Familiarity with MS Office

Pleasant, friendly attitude

Strong interpersonal communication skills
How to apply?
Send us an email at xyz.hr@gmail.com with your resume. Applications close on June 30th
Beena and Vinod both applied for the same job. Beena re-read the job description carefully before her interview. Vinod did not read the job description carefully at all.
Who do you think got the job offer? Why?
Let’s learn how to relate your skills/education to a job description
When we buy clothes or shoes, we make sure that we buy the correct size. This helps us to be comfortable while wearing them. So it’s important to buy the right fit.
Similarly while applying for jobs, it’s important to find the right fit. Job descriptions are an important tool that can help you to find the right fit.
A job description has different sections. Each part of the job description has information that can help you consider if it is a good fit for you. Read each part of a job description and ask the question “Does this description fit me?”
Job Title
The job title is the name of the role that you will be applying for. It conveys the purpose and scope of the job.
Summary
Some job descriptions have a short summary with details about the company and the job. This section can give you important information about the culture of the company.
Our small but growing company is looking for a reliable, organized Office Assistant to manage the day-to-day administrative aspects of running the business. The successful applicant must have a positive attitude, a desire to work efficiently, and excellent communication skills.
This summary tells you that it is a small company. So if you prefer to work in a large company, the summary helps you understand that this is not a good fit.
118
Responsibilities and duties
This section describes what the job will require you to do. It lists all the tasks and actions that you will be expected to complete in this role.
While reading the responsibilities and duties, ask yourself these questions.
Have I had similar responsibilities and duties before?
Would I enjoy working on these things?
Do I have some skills that can help me fulfill these duties well?
If you answered ‘yes’ to some of these questions, the job description helps you understand that it is a good fit.
Qualification and skills
This is a list of expectations that the employer has for the applicants. It sets the conditions for what is required of someone who is applying for the job.
Some qualifications are compulsory - if you do not fulfill that criteria, you cannot be considered for the job. However, sometimes the word ‘preferred’ is used. If you do not meet this condition, you can still apply for the job. If you have strengths in other required skills, the employer will consider you as a potential candidate.
Other details
A job description also includes other important details like job location and the steps to apply for the job.
Read the above-mentioned examples of job descriptions carefully. Choose the correct answer to the questions.
Activity Time!
1. What is the location for the job?
a. Chennai b. Hyderabad
2. What does ‘Familiarity with MS Office’ mean?
a. Having a college degree b. Knowing how to use MS Office application like MS Word or MS Excel
3. A Bachelor’s degree is compulsory for everyone applying for this job. True
or false? a. True b. False
119
What I learnt today:
Put a if you know this topic well.
1. A job description is a simple document which has all the
details about an available job.
2.
It can help us understand if a job is a good fit for us or not.
3.
It’s important to read the different sections of a job description carefully, making note of important details
4.19 Speak and Share Information about Workplace
In this lesson you will learn :
1. How to share specific information about a job or a workplace
2. How to communicate your views and opinions about a workplace
What are the different words used to describe a workplace? Select all the options which you think are correct.
Thinking Box
Office / Organization / Company / Shop / App / Building / Employee / Loan / Bank / School / Plumber
Let’s learn how to share specific information about a job or a workplace
During conversations, we might be required to share information about a job that we are currently doing. A team leader can ask you to share details of a project that you are working on. A friend who is applying for a job in your company can ask you questions about your role. A potential customer can ask you for information about your company and your role in the company.
A conversation about your job can begin if someone asks you one of the following questions.
1. What do you do?
2. What do you do for work?
3. What line of work are you in?
120
Here’s how you can respond to these questions.
STEP 1
Share the name of your job
Step 1 - Share the name of your job

I’m a teacher.

I’m a nurse.

I’m an office assistant.
STEP 2
Step 2 - Tell them where you work
Tell them where you work
If you work for a large and popular company, you can simply share the name of the company.

I’m an office assistant at Wipro.

I’m a nurse at Apollo Hospital.
If your company is not easily recognizable, it’s good to share what kind of company it is or what they do. You can also talk about which city you work in.

I’m a sales manager for a company that sells printers.

I’m a teacher at a play school called A-Z School.
STEP 3
Step 3 - Share some information about your responsibilities
Share some information about your responsibilities
If the person is interested, you can share some more information about what you do at work. You can tell them what kind of work you do or what projects you work on.

I teach maths and art to the children.

I take photographs for the website.

I take care of the office files and documents.
Vikram is a plumber at a small, local company. A potential client asks him “What do you do?” Write down Vikram’s introduction.
Step 1 - Share the name of your job
Step 2 - Tell them where you work
Step 3 - Share some information about your responsibilities
121
Let’s learn how to communicate your views and opinions about a workplace
Now you know how to share basic details about a job! But what if someone asks for your personal opinion on your workplace? How can you talk about how you feel about your job and your workplace? Let’s find out!
There are two important things you can talk about while sharing your opinions on a job.
Talking about the work that you do
The words that you use to describe your work can be positive or negative, depending on how you feel about it.
Positive words to talk about work
Negative words to talk about work
Exciting
Boring
Engaging
Stressful
Rewarding
Challenging
Talking about the people that you work with and workplace culture
Here are a few phrases you can use while talking about the people that you work with.
I love the team I am working in.
My colleagues/coworkers are great.
I work with some great people.
I like the job flexibility.
I enjoy taking on challenges at work.
We must be careful about if it is appropriate in a particular conversation to talk negatively about our job, our workplace and our coworkers. It is alright to do so while talking to friends and family. If you are specifically asked for feedback or criticism by someone in your workplace, you can share your negative opinions in a respectful way. However, it’s not appropriate to speak negatively about your workplace during office conversations or in job interviews.
Write 3 sentences about your experience as a student. (Write 2 positive opinions and 1 negative opinion.)
Activity Time!
122
What I learnt today:
Put a if you know this topic well.
1. We can share basic details about our job and some information about what we do at work clearly.
2. We can also share some positive and negative opinions
about the job.
3.
It is not appropriate to speak negatively about the workplace during official conversations.
4.20 Writing Applications & Cover Letters
In this lesson you will learn :
1. How to write job applications
2. The different types of cover letters
What details about yourself would you include in a job application?
Thinking Box
Let’s learn how to write job applications
A job application is usually the first step in applying for a job. Companies call for job applications to invite qualified people to be part of the hiring process.
There are different methods in which a job application can be submitted. It’s important to check the job description document or the company website to know the type of job application they use.
123
In-person: In this type of job application candidates might have an in-person interview at the mentioned date and time in the advertisement.
Paper: Applicants might download and print the forms from an online source. They must fill in the mandatory areas in the document and post them to the mentioned address on the cover letter. Most of the government job calls will be in the paper format.
Online Job Application: Some companies have an online form that needs to be filled and submitted.
Here are a few common details required in an online job application.
Name and contact details

Education qualifications

Your work experience - including full- time, part-time or volunteer work

Your skills
Read the instructions carefully and ensure that all the details are correct.
Some job applications also include a question or a task that you have to respond with. The question is usually designed to test important skills that the job will require. Some examples of these are:
How many years of MS Office experience do you have?
Why are you a good fit for the role of training manager?
Take some time to work carefully on the task. Note any word limit or other conditions set for the example.
Email Job Application
Some companies ask you to send them an email to apply for a particular job. The email is read by a person who is in charge of choosing the best candidates for the job. The email is a chance for you to make a great first impression. So here’s how you can write an effective application email.
124
1. Subject line: It’s important to make it
Eg. Sruthi Roshan – Teaching Assistant Position
easy for them to find your email. Include your name and the job title you are applying for in the message’s subject line.
2. Greeting: If you know the name of the person, address your email to them specifically. If a name isn’t available, you can open with
Eg. “Dear Sir/Madam”.
3. First paragraph: Explain why the purpose of your email. Mention the specific job that you are applying for and where you saw the job posting.
Eg. Your job posting on Facebook for an Administrative Manager caught my interest. Your description of the work responsibilities matches my experience, and so I am excited to submit my resume to you for your consideration.
4. Second paragraph: Write a few sentences to explain to the person why you are a good candidate for the job. What can you offer the company? What skills do you have that can help you do the job well? What are your past achievements? Highlight your most relevant skills and accomplishments.
Eg. In my position as the student representative at ABC College, I managed student complaints and worked with the college administration to resolve them. I led a team of 5 other students to start a training programme for students.
5. Last paragraph: Thank the person for reading your email, and mention that your resume is attached. Thank them for considering your application. Ask about what the next steps are and offer to follow up.
Eg. My resume is attached. If I can provide you with any further information on my qualifications, please let me know.
6. Closing: Use a polite and formal closing
like “Sincerely” or “Best” at the end of the email. Use your full name.
Re-read and check your email mail for errors before sending it. Make sure to attach your resume to the email
If you could apply for any job in any company in the world right now, what would you apply for? Write an email application applying for the job. Remember to follow the 6 steps.
1. Subject Line
2. Greeting
3. First Paragraph
4. Second Paragraph
5. Last Paragraph
6. Closing
125
Let’s learn the different types of cover letters A cover letter is a letter or a special message written to a person while applying for a job. A cover letter is a document you send with your resume that provides additional information about skills and experiences related to the job you are applying to. A cover letter is usually the first thing someone sees or reads when you apply for a job. If the cover letter is clear and displays your strengths, the person is more likely to take a look at your resume.
If an employer requires a cover letter, it will be mentioned in the job posting. Even if the company doesn’t ask for one, you may want to include one anyway. It will show that you have put some extra effort into your application.
Here are the 3 most common types of cover letters you might write:
1. Application cover letters - This is the most common type of cover letter and is used to apply for a job. Writing this is similar to the email application that we learnt about. You send this cover letter along with the job application.
2. Referral cover letter - This is a letter that you write when a person refers you for a job or introduces
you to the hiring manager. Seeing the name of the person that they are familiar with in the cover letter makes it more noticeable.
3. Prospecting cover letter/letter of interest - If there is a company that you would like to work for, you can write a prospecting cover letter to them. This type of cover letter is used to ask them for more details about the company and information on job openings. This type of cover letter takes the initiative to let the hiring manager know your interest in working with them.
Choose the correct answer to the question.
1. What is a cover letter?
a. A letter of introduction b. A letter that tells someone why you are a good candidate for a job
Activity Time!
2. What details must be included in the cover letter?
a. Skills that will help you do the job well b. Both personal and professional details
3. Roshan’s cousin is friends with the hiring manager at Unlimited Inc. and
gives him the contact details. What kind of cover letter will Roshan write? a. Referral cover letter b. Envelope cover letter
What I learnt today:
Put a if you know this topic well.
1. A job application must be filled to provide correct and
relevant information about your skills and work experience to the employer.
2. An email job application includes a cover letter in the body
of the email.
3. A cover letter is a document sent with your resume.
4. Cover letter provides additional information about skills and
experiences related to the job you are applying for.
126
