
5.1 Importance of Communication
In this lesson you will learn :
1.
Importance of communication
2. Characteristics of effective communication
3. Types of communication
We can communicate in different ways. Are these ways of communication? (Write ‘yes’ or ‘no’ next to each).
Thinking Box
1. Talking 2. Writing a letter 3. Eating 4. Sleeping 5. Sending a Whatsapp message
Let’s learn about the importance of communication
Human beings are social animals. We live in society with other people. In the workplace, we have colleagues. In an institute, there are classmates. At home, we have our family. We are always surrounded by other people. And we communicate with them every day. Sometimes we communicate even without realizing that we are communicating!
Communication is important for three reasons:
1.
It helps us share our thoughts. We think thousands of thoughts every day. Sometimes, we want to share these thoughts with the people around us. In an office, this could be discussing ideas for a new project. At home, it could be as simple as what to prepare for dinner, or how much money to save. In each of these situations, we need to communicate.
2.
It helps us describe our feelings. Sometimes, we want to share our feelings with our friends and family. We may share our happiness, anger and worry - sharing emotions will always make us feel better! Sharing our feelings is an important part of communication.
127
3.
It helps us learn new things. Communication also helps us learn better. When we ask questions or doubts, we are also communicating. This is particularly important in a workplace. Asking doubts helps us understand our work and be better at our job. Strong communication skills is an important professional skill.
Communication is important at the workplace because
Fill in the blanks with the correct option.
1. It helps me discuss my ideas. 2. It helps me share my feelings. 3. It helps me go shopping.
Let’s learn about the characteristics of effective communication Effective communication is an important skill in the 21st century. Being able to communicate well will help us in our career as well as personal life. So what does effective communication involve?
Clarity
One of the most important parts of communicating effectively is being clear. We need to have a clear idea of what we want to communicate. Use simple words when communicating to the other person.
Let’s look at an example. If you wanted to ask for extra time on an assignment at work, which would you choose?
“I am sorry, I have been unable to complete the assignment. I needed extra time to understand the project better. Can I please submit it next Wednesday?”
“You see, I was very busy and I was not able to understand the question. I am very sorry but because I did not understand it I did not do the task. I am working on it but it is not yet complete. Do you think it would be okay if I sent it to you sometime over the next week?”
The first example has the message (incomplete work), the reason (understanding the project better) and a suggested solution (submitting next Wednesday). It is clear.
Completeness
We communicate because we want to share some information. So an important part of communicating well is sharing the information fully! Make sure that message has all the details that we want to communicate. If our message is complete, it helps the listener understand us completely and correctly.
Look at the examples below. Which is a better way to set up a meeting with someone at the office?
“Can we have a meeting?”
“I would like to discuss the email I sent you yesterday. Can we have a meeting for 30 mins, at 4 PM today?”
In the first example, you are asking for a meeting without giving any more details. In the second example, you are describing what it is about, how long you’d like to speak and at what time. That is a complete message and is an example of effective communication.
Listening
128
An important part of communicating well is listening! It is not enough if we share our thoughts. We also need to listen when other people speak. Listening well shows the speaker that we are paying attention in order to understand them.
Here are two emails asking for leave from an employee to their manager. Read them and see which is an example of effective communication.
Email 1
Email 2
Dear Ma’am,
Dear Ma’am,
Please grant me leave next Friday.
Regards, Sheena
I am writing to request one day leave next Friday, on December 23rd 2022. I am scheduled to undergo a minor operation and will be back in office on Monday, December 26th 2022.
Regards, Sheena
Now, fill the table below with ‘yes’ or ‘no’.
Email 1
Email 2
Manager knows what day Sheena needs leave.
Manager knows what date Sheena needs a leave.
Email 1
Email 2
Manager knows why Sheena needs a leave
Manager knows when Sheena will be back in office
Total number of YES
The Email with all four marked ‘yes’ is an example of effective communication.
Let’s learn about the types of communication
There are four important types of communication. It is important to know them so that you can be an effective communicator in each one!
129
Verbal communication
This is anything that we communicate when we speak to other people. Verbal communication can happen face to face, over the phone or via online platforms like Zoom or Google Meet. It can be in formal settings like office meetings or informal settings like when you spend time at a friend’s house.
Non-verbal communication
When you are communicating with someone face-to-face, you need to pay attention to nonverbal communication as well. This includes facial expression, body language, posture and eye contact. Here are some common examples of non-verbal communication:

Fidgeting, shaking your legs or picking at your nails when you are nervous

Yawning when you are sleepy

Sitting upright when you are focused
Written communication
This includes letters, emails and LinkedIn posts. Effective written communication involves short sentences, vocabulary that is easy to understand and a clear message.
Visual communication
Visual communication is using pictures or images to convey a message. This has become a very popular type of communication in the last few years. Posters, videos, pictures and movies are all examples of visual communication.
Match the image to the type of communication it represents
Activity Time!
Written communication
Verbal communication
Visual communication
Non-verbal communication
130
What I learnt today:
Put a if you know this topic well.
1. Communication is important to share our thoughts, ideas
and feelings.
2. Effective communication needs to be clear and complete.
3. Listening is also an important part of effective
communication.
4. There are different types of communication - verbal, non-
verbal, visual and written.
5.2 Verbal Communication: Speaking
In this lesson you will learn :
1. What is verbal communication
2. Difference between spoken and written communication
3.
Importance of good verbal communication
How do you communicate most of the time?
Thinking Box
Let’s learn about verbal communication
Verbal communication is the use of words to share information with others. We can use any language to conduct verbal communication. For example, anything spoken in Hindi, Tamil, Kashmiri, Assamese etc can be verbal communication. Similarly, anything written in Hindi, Tamil, Kashmiri or Assamese is also verbal communication.
Verbal communication can be successful when we choose the right words to share our message. Depending on who we are talking to, it can be done in many ways.
Communicating to yourself
131
Hi, how are you?
I am fine, thank you
One person to a group
Person to Person
How do you usually communicate with yourself? Pick options which you use:
1. Talk to myself 2. Write in a daily book 3. Other ways (
)
Let’s learn about the difference between written and spoken communication
Verbal Communication
Reading and Writing
Speaking and Listening
Books, Magazines, Newspapers, Assignments, Journals, etc.
Face-to-face conversations with friends, teachers, strangers, etc.
Emails, Letters, Messages, etc.
Phone calls, Video calls, Online classes, etc.
Posters, Notices, Instruction Manuals, etc.
Radio, TV, Videos, Music, Podcasts, etc.
Communication always requires two parties to make the communication successful. When speaking, we need a speaker to share the message, and a listener to understand the message. When writing, we need a writer and reader.
The success of verbal communication depends on three main components:
1. The way we communicate
2. The words we use to communicate
3. The way we are understood by others
132
What type of verbal communication are you better at - Writing or Speaking? How can you improve yourself?
Let’s learn about the importance of good verbal communication
Verbal communication, be it through speaking or writing is very important to share information between people. Good verbal communication leads to good relationships between people. It also has a very strong impact on work culture, employee happiness and successful business.
I will be on leave next week. Please deliver this parcel to Ms.Reena before 4pm on Tuesday.
Ok, I will do that. Enjoy your leave.
In any workplace, clear communication leads to faster work. It helps employees do their work well. It also helps the employers to share important information with employees. When verbal communication is simple and clear, it results in minimal confusion.
Let us look at a few examples to understand the power of simple and clear communication.
Give 3 tips to your friend to have simple and clear communication.
1.
2.
3.
You need to communicate about your dream job to your family. But they are not ready to listen to you. How will you find a way to communicate with them successfully?
Activity Time!
133
What I learnt today:
Put a if you know this topic well.
1. Verbal communication is the use of words to share
information
2. The two major forms of verbal communication include
written and speaking.
3. When verbal communication is simple and clear, it results
in minimal confusion.
5.3 Verbal Communication: Writing
In this lesson you will learn :
1. Letter writing
2. Email writing
3. Resume writing
What do you use to write letters and emails? Fill in the blanks with the correct answer.
Thinking Box
1. I write an email using (a pen/an electronic device). 2. I write a letter using (a pen/an electronic device).
Let’s learn how to write a letter A letter is a form of written communication between two people. We can write letters to our friends and family to keep in touch with them. Letters are also useful if we need to communicate with government officials or in workplaces. These letters are known as formal letters. Before the internet was invented, letters were used more commonly.
Writing a formal letter has seven steps. Let us learn what they are!
Step 1: Sender’s address
Always start with the sender’s address at the very beginning of a letter. This is how the reader knows who the letter is from! We must make sure to write our complete address so they know where to send their reply to!
Step 2: Date
Letters take some time to reach their destination. The date is a critical piece of information documenting when the letter was sent.
134
Step 3: Receiver’s address
Just like you wrote your address, you also need to write the address of the reader! This helps make sure that the letter reaches the correct person.
Sender’s address
Step 4: Greeting
We all say “hello” when we answer a phone call. It helps us start the conversation and greet the person we are speaking to. We need to write a greeting in our letter as well. Common greetings include “Hi,” “Hello,” or “Dear ___” where you write your reader’s name.
Date
Receiver’s address
Greeting
Subject
Body
Step 5: Subject
The next step is to tell the reader what the letter is about. We write this by adding “Reg.” or “Sub.” at the beginning of the line. These mean ‘regarding’ or ‘subject’. Remember to keep the subject short and easy to understand.
For example, if you want to close a bank account, the subject can be “Reg. Closure of account number [insert your account number]” You do not need to include the subject in informal letters.
Step 6: Body
Signature
This is the fun part of the letter! This is the part where we get to say everything we wanted to. Letters are often used for official purposes like complaining to local government officials or communicating with banks. Whatever we want to talk about, write it in the body.
Step 7: Signature
When we are done writing everything we wanted to share, it is time to finish the letter. The last thing on any letter is our signature! There are many ways to end a letter. If we know the person well, we can end with “Love,” or “Best wishes”. If we do not know them well, we can end with “Yours Sincerely” or “Regards”. We must remember to add our name at the end!
Once we complete all seven steps, our letter is ready to send.
Tip: Remember to put your letter in an envelope, write your address and the receiver’s address on it, put the stamps it needs and drop it off in a post box! Once you do that, your letter is on its way!
You are writing a letter to your friend. Which one of the following will NOT be a part of your letter? Circle the odd one out.
Your address
A greeting to your friend
Your phone number
The date
Your account number
Your friend’s address
Your signature at the end
135
Let’s learn how to write an email
An email is a letter that we send through the internet using an electronic device. It is a lot faster than posting the letter! Today, emails are an important form of communication. People write emails for work and to their friends. Let us learn how to write an email!
Receiver’s email id
Subject Line
Email body
1. First, to write an email, you need to log in to
your email id.
2. Once you log in, you will see a “Compose” or
“New Email” button on your screen. Click that and you are ready to get started!
Sending an email is a three-step process:
Step 1: Receiver’s email id
Who are we sending the email to? Fill in their email id in the “To” box. This helps our email reach the right person. It is like the receiver’s address in letters!
Tip: Remember to check the spelling of this email id carefully. If we make a mistake, we could send the email to the wrong person!
Step 2: Subject line
The subject line describes what our email is about. Let us look at some examples of subject lines:
1. There is a function in your family that you have to attend on November 24th. You are working in a company and need to apply for leave for that day. The subject line could be “Leave Application: November 24th”
2. Your uncle sent you new earphones as a birthday gift. You are sending an email to say thank you. The
subject line could be “Thank you for the birthday gift!”
Tip: Remember to keep the subject line short and easy to understand. Keep the details for the body of the email!
Step 3: Email body
This is where we write everything we want to say. Just like a letter, we need to start with a greeting. If we are writing to someone we know well, we can use informal greetings like “Hi”, “Hello”, or “Hey”. If we are writing to someone we do not know well, use a formal greeting. This is usually “Dear ___”. The blank can be filled with their name or Sir/Ma’am.
After the greeting, we can write about what we wanted to share. We need to be clear with what we want our receiver to know. Keep the email short. Once we are done, we should remember to sign off our email just like a letter. Examples of formal endings are “Regards” and “Sincerely”. At the very end, we must add our name and email address! For example, a formal email could end like this:
Regards,
Maria
Technician
ABC Pvt Ltd
mariaABC@email.com
136
Tip: Once you are done writing your email, don’t forget to press ‘Send’! Only when you click on ‘Send’ the email will leave your email id.
Which of these lines are good subject lines? Remember - subject lines should be
short and easy to understand! Tick the ones that are correct.
Happy Birthday! Last Sunday, I went to watch a movie and I really liked it but I am still not sure who that actor was.
Let’s learn how to write a resume
Most job applications ask us to send in a resume. So what is a resume? A resume is a document that describes our education and experience. It is a quick and easy way to tell the company why we are the right person for the job. A well-made resume is very important to getting a job. Today, we will learn what is included in a good resume.
Education
Name
Contact Details
Name
When we are introducing ourselves to someone, what is the first thing we tell them? Our name! It should be the first thing on our resume as well. Our name should be at the very top in large font and easy to read.
Experience
Contact details
If the company likes our resume, they will want to speak to us some more. They will want to contact us and schedule this conversation. To make it easy for them to reach us, we should include our phone number, email id and address at the top of our resume. Our address is important because it shows which city we live in.
Skills
Education
In this section, we describe what we have studied. We should start from the most recent and include our Class 12 and Class 10 performance as well.
Experience
In this section, we should talk about any work experience we have. This could be full-time, part-time or volunteer work. We should remember to Include our role, the organisation’s name, the time period we worked and a few lines about what we did.
Tip: Start from your most recent experience. If you are a fresher, do not be afraid to skip this section. It is okay - you are at the beginning of your journey!
Skills
The final section of our resume should talk about our skills. This can include languages we know and softwares (like MS Word and MS PowerPoint).
Remember: According to Indian law, employers cannot discriminate on the basis of age, gender or other identity markers. We do not need to provide these details in our resume.
137
Every section on a resume has a specific purpose. Match the section to what it contains.
Activity Time!
Purpose
Section
It says where I live.
Phone number
It says what I studied.
Address
It says how to call me.
Education
What I learnt today:
Put a if you know this topic well.
1. Letters are written with pen and paper. There are six steps
to writing a letter.
2. Emails are like letters but are sent on the internet using
digital device.
3. A resume is important when applying for a job. There are different sections in a resume for contact details, education, experience and skills.
138
5.4 Non-Verbal Communication
In this lesson you will learn :
1. The meaning of non-verbal communication
2. The appropriate spatial distance for formal and informal
communication
3. The importance of maintaining appropriate body movements
and appearance
Identify if it is a verbal or non-verbal communication.
Thinking Box
Let’s learn about the meaning of non-verbal communication
Non-verbal communication is the process of sharing messages without the use of words - written or spoken. Any communication made between two or more persons through the use of facial expressions, hand movements, body language, postures, and gestures is called as non- verbal communication. It is said that as humans, we communicate more using non-verbal communication, than through words!
Non-verbal communication helps to stress upon what is said using words. For example, if a person needs to communicate that they are sad, he/she will say “I am feeling sad”. When you see them, you will also see them crying or with sad expressions. If you think carefully, you will react to emotions (crying, sadness etc), more than words (I am feeling sad). More than hearing words, when you see someone cry, you understand better. Therefore, non-verbal communication is a very effective way of communicating. Sometimes, it is more powerful than words!
139
There are 6 ways in which non-verbal communication takes place:
Expressions using our face: Our face shows how we feel, through expressions. It is a great way to communicate!
Body posture: The way we stand, sit or use our body shows how we feel about yourself and others.
Touch: We communicate a lot through touch. For e.g, a firm handshake can show confidence.
Space: Space is the physical distance between two people. Depending on the relationship between the two people, distance or space is maintained.
Eye Contact: This helps to understand what others are saying. It is a way to show respect to the other person. Making eye contact while talking shows confidence.
The tone: The tone, speed and volume of our voice communicates a lot. For e.g, shouting shows we are angry. Talking very slowly can mean we are thinking or sick or tired.
Why do you think non-verbal communication is very important to convey a message
Let’s learn about the appropriate spatial distance for formal and informal communication
When you meet another person, you maintain some distance between yourself and the other person. This is called spatial distance.
If you meet your friend, you will sit close to him/her. It is natural to be physically close with your brother/sister and family members. This is because these are close, informal relationships. It is fine to stay physically close to people who are close to you.
140
When you are in a formal environment, distance needs to be maintained between people. For eg., in an office, you should not sit or stand too close to your manager, or co-workers because it is not professional. Such relationships are called formal relationships. You need to maintain a minimum distance of 4 feet between people in a formal relationship.
Why do you think it is good to maintain distance in formal relationships?
Let’s learn about the importance of maintaining appropriate body movements and appearance
It is very important to focus on our appearance - how we look, how we dress, how we sit, stand etc. The way we look helps a lot in our professional life. We need not wear expensive clothes, shoes and perfume. Maintaining cleanliness and having proper body movements helps to show that we are smart, clean and dependable. Let us learn how to do this!
Maintaining proper appearance
1. Wear clean clothes
2. Take a bath, keep yourself clean
3. Cut your nails and keep them clean
4. Comb your hair well
5. Carry your things neatly in a simple bag
6. Do not wear too much makeup or perfume
7. For men, shave properly
See the images below to understand how to sit and stand properly.
141
Activity Time!
Imagine that you have to attend an interview in 1 week. Now, find a partner and make a list of ways in which you will prepare your appearance for the interview. All the best!
What I learnt today:
Put a if you know this topic well.
1. Non-verbal communication is the sharing of messages without
writing and use of words.
2. Non-verbal communication takes place through facial expression,
touch, eye contact and body language.
3.
It is fine to stay physically close to people who are close to you.
4. We need to maintain a minimum distance of 4 feet between
people in a formal relationship.
5. Maintaining cleanliness and having proper body movements is
very important.
5.5 Practicing Effective Communication
In this lesson you will learn :
1.
Identifying formal and informal communication
2. How to introduce yourself effectively
Who was the last person you spoke to? How did they show you that they understood you?
Thinking Box
142
Let’s learn how to identify formal and informal communication
Communicating effectively means that the other person has fully understood what you are sharing. You can know if someone has understood you by the way they listen, respond and continue the conversation.
Identifying formal and informal communication is very important to communicating effectively. Knowing the difference between these two types of communication will help decide what words you use. It will also help you decide whether to communicate verbally or in writing. Here are some questions that will help identify if the communication is formal or informal.
Question
Formal
Informal
Who are you communicating with?
Colleagues & others in office, government officials, strangers
Friends & family
Where are you communicating?
In a workplace or official setting
At home or in other private settings
Will this communication be recorded or looked at again for important reasons?
Often, yes
Usually, no
Formal communication is used in official environments. Very often, verbal formal communication is followed by written communication. This helps record everything that was discussed in a meeting and helps people remember what was decided upon. Informal conversations are casual and do not need to be recorded for later.
Remember: Informal conversation does not mean disrespectful or rude conversation. It only means casual conversation with people you know well.
Who would you speak to formally and who would you speak to informally? Mark “F” for formal and “I” for informal next to each person.
1. Your best friend
2. The local Panchayat official
3. The manager at your new office
4. Your favourite cousin
Let’s learn how to introduce yourself effectively
When we meet someone for the first time, we introduce ourselves. The person forms their first impression of us - based on our introduction.
When we introduce ourselves to a new friend, a teacher or an interviewer, they notice two things about us.
1. Our verbal communication - What are you telling them about yourself with your words?
2. Our non-verbal communication - What are you telling them about yourself without words, through
other things like body language?
So when you introduce yourself, you must work on both your verbal and non-verbal communication.
143
Verbal Communication
Formal Dress Code
1. Use the correct greeting for the situation. If it’s a formal context, say “Good morning!” or “Hello! How are you?”.
2. Tell the person your name. Share a little
information about yourself like what you do and what kind of activities you do in your free time.
3. Speak in a clear and confident voice. Do not
Neatly combed hair
Formal shirt
Neatly combed hair
Minimal jewellery and makeup
whisper or shout.
Non-verbal Communication
1. Maintain eye contact with the person you are
speaking to.
2. Be mindful of your body language. If you are standing, stand straight. If you are sitting, sit up tall and straight. Do not play with any objects with your hands or shake your legs.
Formal trousers
Formal shirt & trouser
3. Give the person a firm handshake when you
greet them.
4. Be dressed appropriately for the meeting. If it is a formal meeting, make sure to wear formal clothes and formal shoes.
Formal black or brown shoes with socks
Simple, neutral- coloured footwear
Momin is going for an interview. Write down what tips she needs to follow when she meets her interviewer.
Activity Time!
How to greet the interviewer
How to sit during the interview
How to talk during the interview
144
What I learnt today:
Put a if you know this topic well.
1. We all spend time and communicate in two kinds of
environments - formal and informal.
2. Formal communication is for communication with colleagues and employers in the workplace. Informal communication is with friends and family.
3. The communication guidelines to be followed are different in
formal and informal settings.
4. When we introduce ourselves to someone, we can make a
good first impression. We must be mindful of our verbal and non-verbal communication.
5.6 Workplace Communication:
Introduction
In this lesson you will learn :
1. The importance of effective communication at the workplace
2. How to eliminate the barriers to effective communication
3. How to use text messaging for workplace communication
You are working in a travel agency. Your manager asks you to check with 2 other team members and schedule a meeting on Thursday. How would you do this?
Thinking Box
Let’s learn about the importance of effective communication at the workplace
Communication at the workplace happens through many channels. During meetings, we speak and listen to the people in the room. In emails and documents, we read and write to exchange information. We make phone calls and video calls to consult with each other. We also send short text messages and notes with each other.
When communicating at the workplace, you might be speaking or writing to a person. For your communication to be effective, follow the 6Cs of communication while forming your message.
145
1.
Is it clear? Are you communicating the information and your views in a way that is easy for the other person to understand?
2.
Is it correct? Is all the information you are sharing correct in every way? Is it free of grammatical errors, spelling mistakes and factual errors?
3.
Is it complete? Have you included all the relevant information that the other person needs to understand? Have you provided all the answers to the other person’s questions? For example, when you send a text message to a co-worker to inform them about a meeting on Thursday, you must also mention where the meeting will take place. Else, the communication is not complete.
4.
Is it concise? Have you communicated your message in a short and precise manner? Have you been brief and to the point (concise)? Have you avoided discussing unnecessary details about other things?
5.
Is it considerate? Have you been considerate of the other person’s mindset, opinions and background in the way you communicate with them?
6.
Is it courteous? Is your communication kind and polite? Have you said ‘please’ while asking for help and said ‘thank you’ when you received it?
Remember the activity at the beginning of the lesson. You are working in a travel agency. Your boss asks you to check with 2 other team members and schedule a meeting on Thursday. Write an email to your team members to communicate this. Check your message with the 6Cs
New Message
To
Subject
Send
146
Let’s learn how to eliminate the barriers to effective communication
There are specific things that can make it difficult to communicate in a workplace. It is good to be aware of these difficulties so that you can avoid them.
1. Language differences: A workplace often has people from different parts of the country. Think of a
team with 10 people - 7 people are from the same city and all speak Marathi. The other 3 people do not speak Marathi because they come from other places. It’s good to avoid speaking in Marathi during meetings and group discussions because it cuts off communication for 3 people. In a workplace, check what is the preferred language and use that for all communication.
2. Unfamiliar words: There are some words that are used a lot that are unique to a particular industry or an office. You might not have heard these words or phrases in other conversations. But you might hear them often at work. You get an email from your team member which says “The due diligence for this project is pending. Let’s table this for now and circle back when it’s done.” There are some words and phrases in this email that you might not know but are commonly used in the office. If you come across words like this, you can use the Internet to find the meaning. Or you can ask a colleague to explain it to you.
3. Different styles of communication: Communication can be done in different ways depending on the people and the workplace culture. Some organizations communicate mainly through emails, while some prefer to have conversations. In some organizations, everyone is required to communicate their work progress daily or weekly. In others, you only need to inform your boss when you finish a project or have problems with the project. Observe these differences carefully when you join a company. In your first few weeks, ask questions to colleagues and to your team leaders. They can help you understand what style of communication is followed there
Can you think of a time when you tried to explain something to someone but they could not understand you at all? Why do you think communication was difficult that day?
Let’s learn how to use text messaging for workplace communication.
The most common method of communication in most workplaces is email. Nowadays, workplaces also use text messaging for regular communication. Workplaces have a preferred app that they use for chatting and texting. Here are some of the popular chat apps used for texting in a workplace.
147
Whatsapp
Slack
Microsoft Teams Google Hangouts
Email can be used to communicate final decisions and for formal requests. You can use workplace chat to have regular conversations with your team, ask simple questions and make quick decisions.
It’s important to remember that using chat at work is still formal and in a professional environment. We cannot send messages in the same way we text our friends and family.
Follow these tips while sending text messages for workplace communication.
1. Send messages with correct spellings. Avoid using short forms and slang like “ur” and “omg”.
2. Avoid using too many emojis.
3. Do not send texts outside of working hours.
4. Use chat to discuss things that need a quick response. If you require a detailed answer or a long
discussion, it’s better to talk over a phone call or in a meeting.
5. Reply quickly to people’s messages. If you need more time to respond, send a message like “Hey! I
need some time to find an answer to your doubts. Can you give me a day please?”
6. Be careful about sending confidential information and documents over chat. Most workplaces have
rules about what should not be shared on chat and must only be shared over email. Check these rules when you join a company and follow them.
Azim and Priya are working on a presentation together. The client changes the meeting time from 10 to 11 am on Wednesday. Azim texts Priya to inform her.
Activity Time!
Write the chat conversation between Azim and Priya.
What I learnt today:
Put a if you know this topic well.
1. Communication at the workplace is important because that is how we exchange ideas and make decisions.
2. Communication at the workplaces must follow the 6Cs. It must be clear, correct, complete, concise, considerate and courteous.
3. Different companies have different communication styles. When we understand this, we make communication easier.
4. Workplace communication often happens through chat
and text messages. We must remember to remain formal while sending text messages for work.
148
5.7 Workplace Communication:
Introduction
In this lesson you will learn :
1.
Importance of teamwork
2. How to work well in a team
When was the last time you were a part of a team? Write down three challenges you faced when you worked as a team.
Thinking Box
Let’s learn about the importance of teamwork
Teamwork is when different people work together on the same task. Whether it is at home, in a classroom or at an office, teamwork is an important part of interacting with others. But why is teamwork important? Let us take an example of building a house to understand this better.

Everyone cannot do everything: It is not possible for the same person to do the construction, plumbing, wiring and carpentry for an entire house. Even if it was possible, it would take a very long time to complete all the work. By working together, the work gets done faster. Working with people who have specialized skills also means the quality of work will be higher.

Teamwork brings new ideas: Working with other people is a great way to listen to new ideas! Each person will have their own thought process and opinion. When deciding what colour to paint the house, everyone is sure to have a different answer! By working together, these opinions get shared and the best option can be chosen.
149
We all like company: Sometimes working
alone can get lonely and boring. Imagine building an entire house all alone! Working with a team gives us other people to speak to, share ideas with and learn from. We all feel happier and learn more when we work together!
The concept of ‘synergy’ best describes the importance of teamwork. Synergy means that the work done by a team will always be better than the work done by each of the team members separately. By working together, we are all better.
Some sports need teamwork as well! Which of these sports needs the players to work as a team?
1. Running 100m
2. High jump
3. Cricket
Let’s learn how to work well in a team
Being a good team player is an important skill to have in any workplace today. Learning to be a good team member is just like learning anything else. It takes practice and remembering some simple rules. Here is what we should keep in mind every time we work in a team.
Have a shared goal
It is important that everyone in the team is working towards the same goal. Understanding the common goal will always help in completing a task in the most effective and efficient way.

Listen actively Listening is very important to teamwork. Ask for your teammates’ thoughts and opinions, and listen to them carefully. Do not interrupt them or go in thinking that your ideas are the best. Listening actively to each other will lead to more creativity and better ideas.
Disagree respectfully
Sometimes people disagree with each other when working on a team. That is completely understandable. If you have different ideas or you do not agree with a teammate’s idea, remember to communicate clearly but respectfully. Explain why you do not agree and invite them to explain their point of view. Be open to changing your mind too!
150

Share - responsibility and credit Finally, remember to share the project. This means sharing the responsibility of the project with everyone in the team. This will help everyone feel involved and motivated to participate. This also means sharing the credit. For example, do not say you completed the project with your team’s help. Instead, say that we all successfully completed the project.
Have a shared goal | Listen actively | Disagree respectfully | Share responsibility and credit
Read the following paragraph about four classmates. Identify which classmate does not work well in a team.
Activity Time!
Jasjeet, Sana, Harish and Priyanka are classmates. Their geography teacher has asked them to do a group project together. It needs to be about mountains but they have to decide what to do. The four classmates are discussing their ideas.
Sana suggests that they make a model of Mt. Everest using clay. Jasjeet says he likes the idea but they do not have enough time. He asks Harish for new ideas. Harish suggests that they do a role play about climbing mountains. Priyanka thinks a role play would be boring. Priyanka suggests they paint a chart with the world’s tallest mountains. Sana and Jasjeet like the idea but Harish is angry. He wants to do only role play. He does not listen to anyone else.
Who does not work well in a team? Jasjeet / Sana / Harish / Priyanka
What I learnt today:
Put a if you know this topic well.
1. Teamwork is important because we can learn from each
other and share new ideas.
2. To be a good team player, we should listen carefully and be
respectful of everyone.
3. A good team shares a common goal as well as
responsibility for the work.
151
5.8 Managing Conflicts
In this lesson you will learn :
1. What is workplace conflict
2. Common causes of workplace conflict
3. How to effectively resolve conflict at workplace
Two of your close friends are fighting about something. They have not spoken to each other for 2 weeks. How can you solve this situation?
Thinking Box
Let’s learn what is workplace conflict
Conflict is a serious argument or disagreement between two people or two groups of people. A conflict usually lasts for a longer period of time. It creates negative emotions towards people.
Have you ever had a fight with a friend? Have you had an argument with your family? Have you been angry and stopped talking to someone?
Then you know what it feels like to be in a conflict. Conflicts happen when people have differences in thoughts (or opinions), or differences in their way of doing things.
What happened when you were involved in conflict?

You felt sad or frustrated and angry.

It was difficult for you to trust each other.

It is difficult for you to work together.

You felt a lot of tension and an uneasy feeling.
Yes, conflicts are difficult situations. But conflicts are also common and happen to all of us. Usually, our differences help us all to learn from each other. But sometimes, these differences can lead to arguments. Arguments create negative situations between friends, families, classmates and even coworkers.
Conflicts in a workplace are common. At a workplace, different kinds of people work together. They need to work together, share ideas & workload. Hence, conflict is common. Workplace conflict can affect people’s ability to work together and cooperate with one another.
152
Describe how you would feel in this situation.
You are speaking in a meeting when your coworker, Kirthi, interrupts you. You think it could be a mistake, and to ignore it. In the next meeting, you notice that Kirthi interrupts you again when you speak. This keeps on happening. How would you feel?
Let’s learn about the common causes of workplace conflict
When workplace conflict happens, we can do our best to solve the conflict. To solve conflict, we must understand what the cause of the conflict is. Workplace conflict usually happens for one of the following reasons.
1. Poor communication: Conflict can be caused
when people do not communicate information and their views to each other clearly. When communication does not happen effectively in a workplace, it can cause a lot of confusion.
Leena sent an email to Abi and Sheki that there would be a meeting at 2.30pm on Thursday. She forgot to mention that they will be meeting in a restaurant, not in a meeting room. Abi did not ask Leena where they will meet. He assumed that they would meet in the meeting room. On Thursday, Leena and Sheki waited in the restaurant. Abi waited in the meeting room. Abi is angry that Leena informed Sheki but did not inform him. Leena is frustrated that Abi is angry with her and he did not make the effort to clarify.
2. Difference in personality and values: In a
workplace we don’t all behave the same way. We each have our unique personalities and values. When our personality is very different from another person in the office, it can sometimes lead to conflict.
Tina and Roshan have to go to another town for an official meeting. The office has given them Rs.1000 for the trip. Roshan suggests that they book train tickets for Rs. 250 each. The train takes 4 hours to reach the town. However, Tina prefers that they hire a cab for Rs. 900. The cab will take them to the town in 2 hours. It is more comfortable to travel than in a train. Tina and Roshan have a long discussion about these options. They think that their suggestion is the best. This leads to a loud argument.
3. Stress: Sometimes workplace conflict occurs because people are tired and stressed. When we are
stressed, it is difficult to be calm and patient. Under stress, we also react to situations faster without thinking about it and trying to understand the person. This can lead to arguments over small issues that can be easily resolved.
153
Monica has not slept well in 4 days. She has been having a headache. So when she goes to work, she’s still tired. At work, they’re working on a difficult and important project. Monica has not yet finished her presentation. Varsha comes to Monica and asks her “Hi Monica! I’m having some trouble with my presentation. Can you help me with the last slide today?” Monica yells back at Varsha “No Varsha I can’t! You need to do your own work. I can’t be doing things for you. I’m not your assistant!”
Q1. Can you think of a time when you were under a lot of stress?
Q2. How did you behave to your friends and family?
Q3. How did it make them feel?
Let’s learn how to effectively resolve conflict at workplace
Workplace conflict must be resolved with patience and kindness. It helps everyone to be happy and efficient at work. A workplace with conflict that is never resolved is a difficult place for people to work in.
What can you do to help resolve conflict at the workplace?
1. Talk directly to the people involved. Avoid talking about
them to other people.
2. Listen to everyone. Allow people to talk about how they
feel.
3. Understand the situation from all sides.
4. Focus on the situation, not the person. Avoid looking at a particular person or their personality as the problem.
5. Take the first step to offer a solution to the problem, even
if you feel the other person is completely wrong.
154
Activity Time!
Reread the conflict situations in the previous section. What is the best way for thease people to resolve the conflict?
1. Leena, Abi and Sheki - The Missed Meeting
On Thursday, Leena and Sheki waited in the restaurant. Abi waited in the meeting room. Abi is angry that Leena informed Sheki but did not inform him. Leena is frustrated that Abi is angry with her and he did not make the effort to clarify. What should Abi do?
a. Talk to Leena and tell her that he understands that it was because of miscommunication. Ask her if they can reschedule the meeting. b. Tell Leena that he is never going to work with her on a project again.
2. Tina and Roshan - Train or Cab?
Tina and Roshan have a long discussion about these options. They think that their suggestion is the best. This leads to a loud argument. What should Roshan do?
a. Book the train tickets without telling Tina about it. b. Understand that Tina is trying to ensure that they have a comfortable journey to the meeting. Offer to help Tina with hiring a cab..
3. Monica and Varsha - Stressed out
Varsha comes to Monica and asks her “Hi Monica! I’m having some trouble with my presentation. Can you help me with the last slide today?” Monica yells back at Varsha “No Varsha I can’t! You need to do your own work. I can’t be doing things for you. I’m not your assistant!” What should Varsha do?
a. Yell back at Monica and call her unhelpful. b. Give Monica some time to calm down. Talk to her later and check if Monica is feeling alright.
What I learnt today:
Put a if you know this topic well.
1. Conflict is a serious argument or disagreement between
people.
2. Workplace conflict can be caused by many things
like stress, lack of communication and differences in personality.
3. We can resolve workplace conflict by being calm, listening
to others and finding a peaceful solution.
155
5.9 Handling Criticism
In this lesson you will learn :
1. The difference between unfair and constructive criticism
2. How to deal with criticism at the workplace
If someone said these statements to you, how would it make you feel?
Thinking Box
1. You did a great job! 2. You need to practise your communication skills. 3. You need some help with using that software. 4. You are a good team member.
Let’s learn the difference between unfair and constructive criticism
Criticism is any comments that are made about your actions or your performance of a task - especially on your weaknesses. Criticism points out our weaknesses and areas where we need more practice
Criticism can be difficult to hear. But criticism helps us to grow and to be better.
Receiving criticism is common in formal situations like a classroom or a workplace. When we work with someone who is more experienced than us (a teacher or a supervisor), they have the knowledge to point out our weaknesses and to help us to grow.
Constructive Criticism: Criticism that helps us to become better - because it helps us improve ourselves.
Unfair Criticism: Sometimes criticism is harsh, unfair and too negative. It can be based on negative emotions. This type of criticism makes us weaker; it doesn’t help us improve.
How can we tell the difference?
We can tell the difference based on how we feel when we receive the criticism!
156
Constructive Criticism
Unfair Criticism
Gives you suggestions on how you can improve. It focuses on steps to take to get better.
Does not help you to fix the problem.
[Ex: Speech was short and not useful]
[Ex: Your speech on Gandhiji was short. More points talking about his non-violent movement would have been better]
Does not attack your personality
[Ex: Your project could have been planned better]
Attacks you personally by commenting on your looks, status in a bad way.
[Ex: You project is as ugly as you]
Focus is on an incident or a task
Focus is too much on your failures and your weaknesses.
Given in a calm and respectful tone
Given in a rude manner, using an angry or frustrated tone
Read these statements of criticism. Draw a star near the statements of constructive criticism.
That is the worst presentation I’ve ever seen! That was a good effort. It would be good if you can talk more slowly in your next presentation. Your last two projects were not completed on time. I can help you to be more organized with your time. You are always late and messing up all your work. Get out!
Let’s learn how to deal with criticism at the workplace
In your time at a workplace, you will encounter both constructive criticism and unfair criticism. How can we respond properly to criticism?
How to respond to unfair criticism?
1. Remain calm. Do not respond to the person’s negative emotions with anger or frustration.
2. Try to find useful advice in the criticism. Is
there some part of the person’s criticism that can help you to improve?
3. Remind yourself that this is unfair criticism. Remind yourself of your strengths and your accomplishments.
157
4. Don’t stay in the conversation for too long if
the person is becoming more angry or frustrated. Leave the place. Ask them if you can continue the conversation another time.
How to respond to constructive criticism?
1. Take a few minutes to understand the criticism. When receiving criticism, our first natural reaction is to talk and explain. Stop yourself from doing that. Think about what they are saying for a few minutes.
2. Listen closely to what the person is saying. Understand their perspective on your weaknesses.
3. Say thank you. Tell the person that you
appreciate that they took the time to talk to you.
4. Ask them questions to better understand the problem and find out what you can do to improve.
Questions such as: a. What can I do to improve in this area? b. Can you help me as I work on this skill?
5. Set a personal plan to improve in the area.
After you finish the conversation with the person, spend 10 minutes alone. Think and write down 3 specific things you can do to improve yourself based on constructive criticism.
If you had to give constructive criticism to a family member, what would you say? Wrote down 5 sentences below.
Activity Time!
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
What I learnt today:
Put a if you know this topic well.
1. Criticism is comments that are made on our actions or performance of a task - especially addressing our weaknesses and failures.
2. Constructive criticism is criticism that helps us to improve
and become better.
3. Unfair criticism is criticism that is not helpful or true.
4. We can respond to both constructive and unfair criticism in
different ways. In both situations, it’s important to remain calm and listen to the person.
158
5.10 Assessing Your
Communication Ability
In this lesson you will learn :
1. To identify the strengths in your communication skills
2. To identify the areas of improvement in your communication skills
Who is a person that you most enjoy talking to? Why do you enjoy talking to this person?
Thinking Box
Let’s learn to identify the strengths in your communication skills
All of us have communication skills. We have been using our communication skills since we were children. You have great strengths in your communication that can be helpful to your community and to your workplace.
Tick the statements that are true.
This is an activity for you to understand your strengths well. Think carefully about if the statement applies to you and add a tick mark.
I find it easy to talk to new people.
I feel confident when I talk to new people.
I can write a letter to clearly explain my views to another person.
I can write an email to someone for a specific purpose.
I understand how to create my own resume.
I know how to speak and write confidently in a formal situation.
I know how to speak and write confidently to friends and family.
I can confidently introduce myself in a formal situation.
I know how to use chat or text messages in formal situations.
I can confidently introduce myself to new friends.
I can stay calm and respond well if I’m involved in any conflict.
I can understand when problems are caused because of lack of communication.
I can work and communicate well in a team.
I can recognise when criticism is constructive and when it is unfair.
I know how to respond to constructive criticism from someone.
159
Here are 6 communication badges! Choose any 2 to award to yourself.
Listening
Friendliness
Non-verbal
Confidence
Digital
Asking questions
Let’s learn to identify the areas of improvement in your communication skills
Great! You know your communication strengths! Now let’s think about areas where you can improve and become a better communicator.
Tick the statements that are true.
This is an activity for you to understand your areas of improvement. Think carefully about if the statement applies to you.
I feel nervous when I talk to new people.
I do not know how to write a letter to clearly explain my views to another person.
I find it hard to write an email to someone for a specific purpose.
I do not know how to create my own resume.
I do not know how I need to speak and write to communicate in a formal situation.
I do not know how to speak and write to communicate with my friends and family.
I feel nervous when I have to introduce myself in a formal situation.
I do not know how to use chat or text messages to communicate in formal situations.
I find it difficult to introduce myself to new friends.
I become frustrated and respond with anger if I’m involved in any conflict.
I become frustrated and confused about why people cannot understand what I’m communicating.
I struggle to communicate while working in a team.
I find all criticism to be unfair and hurtful.
I am not sure how to respond to constructive criticism.
If you have ticked some of these statements, congratulations! You now know what areas you can work on. You can seek help and practice these skills. Next year, these areas of improvement will be your strengths!
160
Write 3 specific things that you can do to improve your communication skills.
Activity Time!
This month, I will…
In the next 6 months, I will…
In the next year, I will…
What I learnt today:
Put a if you know this topic well.
1. All of us have strengths and areas of improvement in our
communication skills.
2. We must think carefully and reflect to find our strengths
and areas of improvement.
3. We must celebrate our strengths. We must have a clear plan for how we will work on our areas of weakness.
161
